The preface to the gentle Reader.GOD that is my record, and searcher of all men’s hearts (good Christian Reader) knoweth,  that with unfeigned heart I greatly wished this declaration of my repentance, and desire to be received to the true Church, to be imprinted, for two principal causes: the one, to certify my dear country men of my reconciliation to the true Church, the other of my disposition to do them good hereafter, when it shal please God to increase me with greater knowledge, and to manifest how it hath pleased Christ our Sauiour the head shepheard,  to call me away by his instruments the faithfull and godly, from the whore of Babylon,  from the schole of error and from the temple of heresie, to the City of righteousnesse, the true Church, his vndefiled spouse. I doubt not but that the godly and vnfeined louers of the glorious and comfortable Gospell of Iesus Christ will heartily reioyce and giue God thanks, that it was his diuine pleasure to bring me a lost sheepe into his folde,  and to him make their prayers in my behalfe, that he of his bountifull mercie will vouchsafe to graunt me continuall perseuerance therein euen vnto the ende of my life, that I may neuer swarue from his heauenly trueth vnto blindnesse and errour,  wherewith once seduced by false prophets, I was holden captiue. But nowe hauing the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, the trueth of his sacred worde, and perfect loue of the faithfull on my side, I passe not what wicked Papistes speake or do against me: their immoderate and vnciuill bitternesse proceeding from the furious and stormie passions of their poysoned hearts I may well lament, but restraine I can not: therefore I say, Let the Papists here in England fret and fume, and say of my name what euill or slaunder they can deuise, let them write their letters to Rheims in Fraunce, and from thence to Rome with the poste, and certify all the English Scholers there, that the Popes scholer their owne companion and fellow student is reuolted from papistrie, hath left the Pope in plaine fielde, and quite denyed him, protested against his blasphemies, and renounced the deuilish dregges of all his Idolatrie. So soone as these letters shal come to viewe,  they will name one Father Parsons Iesuite a Prophet, or Southsayer, for that he at Rome in the English Seminarie in a certaine exhortation made to the schollers, prophecied that one or other of that company (my selfe being then present amongest them) shoulde degenerate from their faith, and be the ouerthrowe of that colledge: he confirmed also the profe thereof by example, beginning with Christ and his Apostles,  and pyking out Iudas one of the colledge of Christ that forsooke his master, and then from the colledge of the Apostles he named Nicholaus that reuolted.  Nowe will their diuines declayme in the refectory pulpit of my sudden sequestration, and estranging from their brotherly societie. The triall and experience of their rash iudgement, hatred, and enuie, mocking and scoffing, had and pronounced against others, giueth me sufficient notice that I shall incurre their like rayling, and misreport. I know that I cannot be voyde of their imagined slaunders, in iudging me to be the first begotten sonne of the deuil, I cannot escape their sinister exposition of all things to the worst: wherefore I must arme my selfe with patience, and seeing through Gods goodnesse I am reduced from the miserable captiuitie of blindnesse and errour, to the true vnderstanding and knowledge of Gods holy trueth, I neede take no great thought for their conceiued choller, slaunderous speach, and rayling wordes of Sathans prompting, sithens they haue dealt so maliciously with my betters. And as for their holy father the Popes curse with booke, bell and candell, it shall not grieue me at all, neither will I take one vnquiet nappe for al his banning and cursing: and seeing I haue renounced his Popish church, wherein I neither heard the worde of God syncerely taught, the Sacraments rightly administred, nor the Name of God duely called vpon: Seeyng that (I say) I forsooke the idolatrous church of Rome, and haue so gone from it,  as Daniel went out of the lyons denne, and the three children out of the furnace, and am come to that Church, wherein the most earnest Papistes them selues can not deny (if they will say truely and as they thinke in their owne conscience) but all things be gouerned purely and reuerently in this true Church of Christ, I haue a desirous minde to profit my louing countrymen, according to the Talent which God of his bountifulnesse shall giue vnto me, in preaching vnto them his holy word, in exhorting them vnto watchfulnesse and prayer against Romish doctrine, which is builded vpon false miracles and traditions of men, beeing the fantasticall deuises of their busie braine for lucre and ambition sake: fynally in warning them vnto amendement of life, that both by their faith and conuersation Gods name may be glorified. If thou art a member of that church the spouse of Christ, whereof he is head, and not Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome, it needeth not then (good christian Reader) much to entreat thee to take in good part this vnlearned declaration of my reconcilement made as it were ex tempore, my selfe being in prison and wanting bookes, to the great impediment and hinderance of this my discourse. The beneuolence of the Papistes I seeke not, for if I shoulde, it were but in vaine, I can not obteine it, for that I haue with vpright conscience made a true rehearsall of such thinges as I haue seene at Rome, yet not all, nor the twentieth part thereof, but here one thing, and there another, and so fewe thinges in all: and this I adde in the ende, if they can not afforde one good worde by mee, yet for good fellowshippe sake let them then say, Requiescat in pace, but let it be a solemne dirge for Aristotles soule, who neuer knew the true God, but euer liued in gentility and blindnes of the trueth, that he may be deliuered out of Purgatory where they hold him to be, so that we may haue conference with him, and know of him whether it be substantiall and true diuinitie such as he taught and set forth in writing, or els whether it be Plato his diuinitie, who was an Heathen or Gentile, and which of them is best: and as for the diuinitie which Christ preached, and was deliuered by the Apostles, and received of the faithfull, they are not acquainted with. God euermore enflame and direct me with his holy Spirit, that the zeale of his trueth may throughly pearce and possesse my heart, that I may safely walke in the wayes of righteousnes and holines al the dayes of my life, and vtterly abandon and detest all hypocrisie, and idolatrous superstition.A declaration of Gods benefites towardes me a wretched sinner.HOwe prouident a patrone, and bountifull a father the Lorde of life hath bene vnto me his vnthankeful and rebellious childe, his sundry and manifolde benefits doe testifie, and this my unfeigned reconciliation to the true Church doeth verefie the same, yea the continuance of his louing kindenesse was herein principaly declared: for whereas mine owne natural corruption wrought dayly in me the banishment out of his fauour, and the danger of reprobation, he notwithstanding in consideration of my frailtie, neuer withstoode to helpe me in all dangers both bodily and ghostly, and to plucke me out of the pit of perdition, whereinto the haynousnesse of my offences haled me by violence. Oh gratious God, howe shall I a sinner, conceiued in sinne, and brought vp in iniquitie, worthily aduance the excellencie of thy loue? who shal giue me a heart to conceiue this thy kindnesse? whence shal I haue vtterance to sound out thy mercie? Of my self (because I am a vessell of wrath subiect to sinne, death, hel and condemnation) I can not conceiue so perfect a worke: thou therefore which art the euerlasting fountaine of all goodnesse,  giue it me, oh giue it me, and I shall haue it, and in the hauing of it I shall magnifie thy Name, extoll thy power, and marueile at thy mercy. Thou hast had speciall regard to my fraile estate, and safetie of my soule. I had once lost the precious pearle of thy blessed Gospell,  which is the true iewel of all christian ioy, but by thy gratious gift I haue found it againe, in consideration whereof, Christian duety bindeth me to take the sacrifice of thankesgiuing,  and burne the same vpon the altar of an humble heart, that the redolent and perfumed incense thereof ascending vp into heauen,  may be acceptable to thy diuine Maiestie, whose speciall delight is in such a burnt sacrifice and oblation.A discouerie or laying open of my zeale in Poperie, and howe I preached before that Antichrist of Rome, and also of the causes of my most happie conuersion to the trueth.IT is not yet a twelue-moneth past (good Christian audience, and welbeloued brethren in our sauiour Christ) since that, before some of you nowe prysoners, and th?? my scholefelowes, I preached, as you know, commaunded by our superiours at Rome, in defence of the Romishe Religion, which nowe (God be thanked therefore) (being reduced by the godly and dayly counsell of the ryght worshipfull Syr Owyn Hopton Knight, Lieutenant of her Highnesse Towre of London, the str??g and pith thy perswasions of learned Preachers, which through his meanes and permission, had accesse vnto me, and the hearing of their fruiteful sermons, confirmed by the true and liuely word of Christ Iesus) I vtterly detest. How earnest I was then in perswading the English Students to embrace Papistrie, and in exhorting you sometimes my Scholefellowes, (as the Popes Apostles,) faythfully to doe your message, const??tly to take the crosse of Christ vpon you in all troubles and afflictions, and couragiously to abide Martyrdome, I thinke you haue in remembrance. About halfe a yeere past,  I was also requested by the Prefect or Master of the English Stud??ts, named father Peter Iesuite, a Spaniarde borne, to make a Sermon in the Latin tongue, vpon the festiual day of Peter ad Vincula, certayne English Doctours of the citie, and some of the Popes Chappel, with other str??gers being present at dinner. I preached then contrary to y  true Religion, against faith, the buckler of our defence, the Towre of refuge, the enemie of desperati??, the comfortresse of the afflicted, and the perfecte way to saluation. I preached also repugnantly to maintaine popish idolatrie, against the heauenly Gospell, the newe Testament, and last wil of our Sauiour Christ. Thus dyd I wilfully fyght agaynst Gods worde, albeit my conscience cryed within me day and night, This is not the right way to get eternall life, thou must worship God,  and not a stocke or stone. Well, it pleased God of his mercifull goodnesse to visite me with grieuous sicknesse both of bodie and minde, two dayes after I made this Latin Sermon, which was the Wednesday after S. Peter ad Vincula his day.  Truely then lying very sicke in my bedde, and more like to die, then liue, conscience so pricked and disquieted me, that I feared condemnation: my conscience alwayes suggesting, and as it were telling me, Papistrie to bee an idolatrous and superstitious religion. Yet for all that, I thought that religion to haue bene best, although I disputed often against the same, insomuch that many of my scholefelowes suspected me to haue bin an heretike (for so terme they Protestantes. ) One of you that was prefecte of our chamber in the Englishe Seminarie, may easely gather that I was no true louer of the Gospel, when as I so sharply spake, and preached against the professors therof. And how vnwisely I slept, in the coldest time of the yere the last winter, vpon hard boards, forsaking my bedde,  howe I scourged my selfe with whipcordes, and how I fasted twise in the weeke: you may coniecture by this, that I was a Papist, which woulde seeke so to shorten mine owne life: you know also, how I tooke thereby a vehement cough with continuall spitting, which since your departure grewe to a dangerous disease, wherof I thanke God I am nowe recouered. My Confessor dyd aduise me to such and so extreme discipline and correction of my bodie, as had I stil followed his directions, I had bene dead yer nowe, and put in the grotte, for graues haue they none at Rome, but Vawtes. If this be good or wholsome counsel for a man so to correct himself, that hee shall bee the cause of his owne death, iudge you. But Ileft those superstitions, and suffered reason to rule my wil, before it was too late, and hauing recouered my health, I presented my selfe before the Pope, and obteyned leaue to goe to Rheims, for that the ayre there was more t??perate. I had before that time made an Oration and a Sermon in the Latin tongue, pres??ted before the Pope and foure Cardinals, and before all them that were with the Pope in the Consistorie. If you my brethren yet prisoners within the Towre, deny the assertion thereof, yet to your shame, and my credit, they that shall goe to Rome for pleasure sake, may safely goe to the Popes Protonotary, dwelling fast by Saint Peters church in the inquisitory palace, or to any of his clarkes, and there make inquisition of my name, which is registred in three great paper volumes, of such as are alwaies present, wryting in chambers, to whom all men without daunger may resorte: where, turning to my name, they shall finde y  Sermon and Oration conteyning tenne sheetes in Paper, for the which the Pope gaue me great thankes, and so did the Cardinals, with all the rest. Moreouer (which I had almost forgotten) being before the Pope, I had a wallet for foure Priestes, and a Doctor, and others, full of Agnus deis, Grana benedicta, Medellas, Crosses, and Beades, with other trasshes: and forasmuch as I had neuer before that tyme seene the Pope blessing wallets, I did hold y  wallet before him, and would haue had him to hold it vpon his lappe, and so to haue blest it with his red cappe. Well, I neuer drewe backe my hand from him, vntill extraordinarily he had blest it three times, which before that time as I thinke, was neuer seene. So that England is happie, which hath gotten such a wallet, with so many blessings, wherby (perhaps) they may deliuer their Grandsiers apace out of purgatory: it is a strange thing to see what vertue may be thrust into a wallet. O vnwise people that trust to such trasshes. If I had money plentie, I would get you a thousand blessings, but God blesse vs all from such hypocriticall benedicities. Well, concerning my iourney, I forsooke Fraunce, and came not at Rheins: but traueiled thorowe Germany, and arryued in Englande, and was within eight dayes taken prisoner, and brought to the Towre: and being there kept in prison for Papistry, I thought it good to c??sider the estate of my religion, not fearing the death of the bodie,  so much as the condemnation of my soule, to burne in hell fire for euer, if I helde not true religion, although that others in their bookes should write me a holy Martyr. Thus in prison with a sorowfull minde, a carefull thought, and a troublesome conscience, I spent the time, where with sobbing teares and hearty prayers, I craued of GOD, that he of his merciful goodnes, would vouchsafe to assist mee in al troubles and persecution, that valiantly I might bee able to fight vnder his banner, stoutely to ouercome the subtil assaults of the deuill,  prudently to despise the deceitful promises of worldly felicitie, manfully to abandon the frailtie of the flesh, and ioyfully to take vp the crosse, and followe Christe, euen to the death, the death of martyrdome. It pleased God, hearing this my foolish petition, and knowing me to be seduced by false prophets, (I say not, ne dare say, such as you my brethren are,) for that I hope you haue determined to recant your wicked religion: but I doe, and may boldly say, such as you were before your apprehension, and imprysonment here in the Towre. Well, I say, it pleased God of his goodnes, knowing me to bee in errour, to lighten myne eies, that I might clearely see the abominable Idolatrie, the pernitious superstition and vaine ceremonies, which are vsed and practised in al Co??tries, where Antichrist reigneth, who is an enemy of God, a robber of his honour, a false seducer of y  people, a disturber of c??mon weales, a corrupter of Gods holy word, a Coziner of princes, a setter downe of newe lawes and strange c??mandements, otherwise then our master Christ in his blessed word doeth allowe: and briefly, a great stumbling blocke of offence to infinite thousandes of the true louers of the Gospell, an open persecutour, and a bloudie butcher. Wh?? my heart was prepared to perceiue the fickle fundation of this vnsauored religi??, I recanted from the bottome of my heart, and bewailed that euer I was a Papist: but afterwards somewhat comforting my selfe, I craued, and doe craue, and shall with Gods helpe aske mercy and forgiuenesse, for al my idolatrous crymes and faultes committed against his diuine maiestie. I shal become of a Rebell a true subiect, of an enemie of the trueth, an embracer thereof. I will study and endeuor by God his grace during my life, that his wrath and indignation worthily deserued, may be pacified, and that I may be founde acceptable in his sight at y  dreadfull day of iudgement,  when euery man shall giue an accompt of his Stewardship. I wil moreouer do what I can to reforme the iudgement and conscience of our Aduersaries, and to bring the enemies of the Gospell to the loue thereof.  But it is not in him that willeth, neither in him that runneth, but in God that sheweth mercie. There shall want no diligence in me by gods helpe, in this my first sermon after my recantation, to haue you my brethren brought into the way of saluati??, who yet hitherto (as it seemeth) either ignorantly or wilfully w??der from the same. I haue chosen a Theame fit for my purpose to discouer the errours and vanities of your religion. But before I enterprise to discourse o• my text, I thinke it most needeful to make my prayer to God, that I the preacher may with a pure minde, feruent zeale, wholesome doctrine and bolde vtterance, instruct you that bee here present, and that you the hearers may diligently marke, and obediently follow y  which is taught, y  you may heare Gods word with reuer??ce, and practise the same in your life and conuersation, that I may preach to the honor of God, to y  extolling of his benefits towards vs miserable wretches, to the edifying of his church, to the enlargement of his holy kingdom, to y  aduancement of the trueth of his sacred Gospel, to the extirpati?? of sinne, to the abolishing of Papistry, to y  reformation of you y  bee infected therewith, to the plucking down of Babyl??, and finally to y  building vp of the walles of Ierusal??. In which prayer I c??mende to your good deuotion the whole estate of Christ his church milit??t here on earth, andc.IN this parcell of scripture, good Christian audience, and welbeloued brethr??, we haue three things worthie to be noted. The first is a caueat, warning, or watch word giuen by our Master Christ, wh?? he sayth, Cauete a falsis prophetis? Beware of false prophets. False teachers of men’s traditions, Romish Priestes, craftie seducers, he biddeth vs take heede of such deceitfull Iuglers. In the seconde poynt or c??ma, he telleth vs their outward habit, by the which we may distinguish and know them from true Prophets, when as he saith, Qui veniunt ad vos induti vestibus ouium: Which come to you in sheepes clothing. In the thirde poynt, which is the shutting vp of the sentence, he sheweth vs their inward habit, Sed intrinsecus sunt Lupi rapaces: But inwardly they are rauening wolues, deuourers of the flocke. These three poyntes or diuisions will I handle, God willing, in order, as the text giueth me occasion. Our auncient aduersary the serpent (derely beloued in our sauiour Christ) was neuer more busie to seeke the destruction both of body and soule, the time neuer more dangerous to fall, the people neuer so leude and prone to sinne and idolatrie, the Papistes neuer so vigilant to deceiue their owne countrymen, as in these our latter dayes, whereof Christ prophecied: neyther seeke they onely to spoyle them of their goods, but also to plucke them from the trueth and ready waye to saluation, vnto wicked errour and idolatrous superstition, and from the perfect path that leadeth to life euerlasting, vnto the lam??table way of endelesse torment and vtter destruction. Wherefore my brethren, if you haue the feare of God before your eyes, if you haue the loue of trueth dwelling in you, if you haue an especiall care to saue your soules, yeelde not to the serpentes perswasion, take heede of false prophets, c??sent not to the doctrine of Romish priests, the Popes Apostles: For sayeth one, Dum Romani sacerdotes qu?? maxime possunt, enituntur multa praedicare, quae saluti animarum c??uenire videantur, non pauca praedicant, quae ad perennem animarum perniciem duc??t: Whiles that the Romish priests endeuor as much as they may, to preache many thinges, which seeme to agree to the saluation of soules, then teach they not few things which tende to the perpetuall destructi?? therof. The first point of their deuilish doctrine, in seducing the blinde and ignorant people, is this, To tell vs, that we leaue this article of our Creede vnbeleeued, Credo sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, I beleeue in the holy Catholike Church, if we acknowledge not the Romane church to be the holy catholique Church. As though that were true. In the iudgem??t of all the learned and godly, the Catholique Church is dispersed ouer the face of the earth, not tied or vnited to any proper place as Rome, or person as the Pope. The Councill of Nice, in tyme past committed the charge of the Catholique Church, to three principal Patriarkes, Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, which afterwards came to Constantinople. Nilius in his booke de primatu Romani Pontificis, of the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, sayth, Quandoquidem quaed?? prouinciae spectant ad ecclesiam Romanam, aliquae ad Episcopum Alexandriae, and aliquae ad Episcopum Constantinapolaeos, iam non magis subditae sunt Romano Episcopo, quam Romanus Episcopus subditus sit illis:  Forasmuch as certayne countries are limited to y  church of Rome, certeine to the Bishop of Alexandria, and certeine to the Bishop of Constantinople, they are now no more vnder him, then he vnder them. I gather by this Councill of Nice, which all Papists of Rome do allowe, that the Church of Rome was not onely accompted Catholique, but also the Church of Alexandria was taken to be Catholique, and in like maner the Church of Antioch. I am certeine you wil not deny the Bishop of Rome euer heretofore to haue bene, and as yet to be Pope, therefore I inferre the Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishoppe of Antioch to be Popes, and Christes Vicars, and so consequently to be three Popes, and three Christes Vicars. Haue you taught our English men so, y  there be three Popes, and three Catholique churches, and are you put in prison therefore? No, no, I know it is otherwise. I take you to be hirelings. Pope Gregory the xiii.  of that name, or rather by his right name, Hugo Bon compaignion, Hugh goodfellowe, hath brybed you with his money, that you should preach him to be Pope alone, and none other. Is this pretie stuffe, vt amor nummi esset casus multorum, that the loue of money should be the fall of many? I will speake a litle more touching your Catholique church. Athanasius saith, Roma est metropolis Romanae ditio nis, Rome is the mother church (not of the whole worlde) but of the prouince of Rome. I wil not speake of Engl??d, Ireland, Scotland, Fr??ce, D??marke, Polonia, Suetia, Bohoemia, of Germanie, Heluetia, Prussia, Russia, Lituania, Pomerania, Austria, Rhetia, Vallis, Tellina, andc. where the Gospel florisheth. But is your church y  mother church? and hath your Pope gouernm??t and iurisdiction ouer the churches in Asia and Affricke? It is well known that there is Christianitie in Asia, Affricke, Armenia, Aethiopia, Cyprus, Constantinople and other places, where the Pope dareth not once peepe, for all his pontificalitie at Rome. And in respect of all Christian assemblies and faithfull members, wheresoeuer the church is called Catholique, that is meant vniuersall. So that your church and all churches are to bee tried and known not by your erring councils, canons, constitutions, decrees and glosses, but by y  word of God, which is the touchstone of trueth. Ireneus saith,  Columna and firmamentum ecclesiae est Euangelium and spiritus vitae. The pillar and buttresse of the church is the Gospell and spirit of life.  Augustine vnto y  Donatistes saith, Sunt certe libri dominici quorum authoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus: ibi quaeramus ecclesi??, ibi discutiamus causam nostram: There are verely bookes of our Lorde, vnto the authoritie whereof eche part agreeth, eche part beleeueth, and eche part regardeth,  there let vs seeke for the church, and thereby let vs examine and trie our matters. This I thought good to note here, least that any of this faithfull congregation should at any time be caried away with y  bare name of your catholique churche. Nowe moreouer you seeke to proue your church by antiquitie, multitude, succession of person or place, none otherwise then false coyners, who will not haue their money know?? by the finenesse of golde, or by the touchstone, but by the waight, by the sounde, by the coyne, and by the colour which they may easely counterfeite. Therefore they alledge antiquitie vnto vs, following that which was spoken vnto Iob by one of his friendes,  Consule quaeso priscam aetatem, et compara te ad peruestigationem maiorum illorum: Aske for the auncient generation, and prepare thy selfe to seeke for the fathers.  Prouecti aetate loquentur, et annosi notam facient sapientiam: Dayes shall speake, and the multitude of yeeres shall teach wisedome. To whom I could answere by Iob himself, eu?? in y  verse next following,  Magistri semper sapientes non sunt, neque senes omni tempore intelligunt Iudicium. The masters are not alwaies wise, neither do y  olde men alwayes vnderst??d Iudgement. Profectò spiritus ille in mortali,  et afflatus omni potentis efficit eos intelligentes: It is y  spirit of God, and not yeres, that ought to speak in man.  If antiquitie should preuaile, why then (I pray you) is the Church compared to a little Barke or Ship, which the more she is vpon the sea, the more shee leaketh: vnto a house, which with age decayeth and falleth to ruine: to a Citie and the policie of it, which is corrupted from tyme to time, if it be not brought backe to the first institution: and to a mans body, whereunto yeeres do bryng all kindes of euill: to be short, age is euen as sickenesse it selfe to the most healthfull and temperate body in the world. I say th?? that antiquitie alone ought to make vs thinke, y  in the Church there is a great sicknes, and much filthynes, and that euen for this cause alone, without any longer confutation, it is requisite to bring a broome to purge it, and to call for a Physition. So farre is it off, that for these things a man should mainteyne your Churche to bee pure and holy, as you do. Furthermore I demand, how you wil answere vnto Saint Augustine, entreating vpon the threescore and fourth Psalme, who sayth, That Ierusalem began by Abel, and Babylon by Cain. The promise was made by Isaac, and the bastardise by Ismael. Who were the elders? If antiquitie were a marke of the trueth, how woulde you haue answered vnto y  Iewes, who tolde Christ that they were the children of Abraham,  who was the first father of the beleeuers? They had their Genealogie from the creation of the fyrst man, they did alledge the couenants that were made betweene God and them. Notwithstanding, Christe being sent vnto them according to these promises, vnder the shadowe of this antiquitie, they maliciously called hym the carpenters sonne, a Samaritane,  one that had the deuil, and a preacher of Noueltie. And there is great likelyhood, y  if some of you Papists had bene th?? there, seeing at that time they vsed y  selfe same arguments, you would haue holpen to haue crucified him. Furthermore, what wil you answere vnto the Greeke Churches, the Armenians, Ethiopi??s, andc. founded by the Apostles, and as olde as the church of Rome, yea and elder too, seeing that the Church of Christ, as we know, tooke her beginning from the East to the West? If antiquitie be a marke of holines and puritie, they are holy and pure: and if they bee holy and pure, then the latin Church in comparison of them, is moste vnholy and impure. If they bee Heretiques and impure, then it followeth that antiquitie is not a marke to proue the holines or veritie of the Church. Howe then? shall we reiect antiquitie? nay rather, we imbrace it with all our hearts, so that it bee agreeable to Gods worde. Tertullian de Virginibus velandis, saith, Consuetudo initium ab aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsum per successionem corroboratur, and ita aduersus veritatem vendicatur. Sed Dominus noster Christus veritat?? se, non consuetudinem cognominauit. Viderint ergò, quibus nouum est, quod sibi vetus est. Haereses non tam nouitas, quàm veritas reuincit. Quodc??que aduersus veritatem sapit, hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus c??suetudo: Custome either of simplicitie, or of ignorance, getting once an entrie, is inured and strengthened by succession, and then is defended against the trueth. But Christ our Lorde calleth himselfe trueth, and not custome.  Let them take heede therefore, vnto whome the thing seemeth newe, that in it selfe is olde. It is not so much the noueltie of the matter, as the trueth that reproueth an heresy. Whatsoeuer sauoreth against the trueth, is an heresie, be the custome thereof neuer so olde. Victi ratione opponunt consuetudinem, quasi consuetudo sit maior veritate. Beyng ouercome with reason, they defende themselues with custome, as though custome were better th?? the trueth. We may not prescribe of custome, but wee must ouercome with reas??. Custome without trueth is the mother of error. Istud non est curandum quod aliquis ante nostr?? tempus fecit, sed id precipue nobis curae debet esse, {quod} a Christo factum est. Non est imitanda nobis hominum consuetudo, sed dei veritas expectanda: That is, We must not regard y  which any other hath done before vs, but we must regarde that which Christ hath done, which is before all. For we must not followe thecustome of men, but the trueth of God. Againe he saith,  Mos sine veritate, est vetustas erroris. Et dixit dominus, Ego sum veritas: and n?? loquutus est Dominus, Ego sum consuetudo: Custome without trueth is an old error. And y  Lord hath said, I am the trueth, and not, I am custome. Ignatius sayeth,  Quem non audire est manifesta perditio: Whome not to heare is manifest perdition. See then howe the most auncient sende vs alwayes to learne the trueth of him, which is most ancient of all. Thus much briefely touching antiquitie or custome. Nowe let vs come to multitude. It is sayde expressely,  Exodus. 23. Ne insistito vestigiis potentiorum ad mala: Thou shalt not folowe a multitude to do euil. Also, Mat. 7. Lata est porta, and spatiosa via quae ducit in exitium, multique sunt qui ambul??t per medi?? eius. Wide is y  gate, and broade is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. C??trariwise, Luke. 12. Ne time, ô parue grex, nam visum est patri meo dare vobis regnum: Feare not, my litle flocke, for it is my fathers will to giue you a kingdome. Moreouer, wee see how that all the worlde was brought to one Noah, and afterwardes came to Abraham, then God chose one people of Israel, the least (as it is sayd) of all peoples, and finally of all peoples the least parte, that is to wit, Christendome: which for this cause he calleth a litle flocke, so farre forth, that S. Augustine saith, That y  Church was sometime in one Abel, and in one Enoch. August. super Psalm. 128. Wherefore multitude ought rather to be presumption, then a marke of the true Church. Forasmuch also as man by nature is always more prone to euill, then to any goodnes, if multitude shoulde take place, then Paynims should be happier then we be, for y  they surpasse in nomber. For whereas there is one that beleeueth in Christ our Sauiour, you haue a thousande that beleeue him not. What a multitude is there of Turkes, of Iewes, and other infidels? Also in Noah his tyme, what a multitude there was y  would not acknowledge God, nor folow his commandements, nor giue credit to Noah his preaching, but with one consent conspired against him, mocked him, and his religion, Gen. chap. 6. The Samaritanes were more in n??ber, then they of the tribe of Iuda. And in Iuda and Israel, the multitude of the idolaters was the greater. For the Prophet Elias made his complaint, that he was left alone, and that all the rest had forsaken their liuing Lorde, and giuen them selues to idolatrie: and as you may reade in Ieremie 4.  There arose vp 400. false Prophets, who swarued from Gods lawe, and folowed their owne imaginations, against one good Prophet Micheas. And the Prophets crie,  Omnem populum seductum fuisse, a regibus vsque ad Sacerdotes and Prophetas: That all the people were deceiued, euen from the Kings, to the Priestes and Prophets. In the Church of Christ also, nomber and multitude shall haue as small roume: for euen at the beginning thereof,  it was sayde, Who hath beleeued our word? and to whom hath the Arme of the Lorde bene reueiled? Anon after the death of our Sauiour, the Scholemen hold, y  for one instant, the church stood in the Virgin Mary alone. In the time of Arrius, almost the world throughout, was of y  Arrian heresie, and fewe besides Athanasius, with fiue of his company, professed the true fayth.  Wherefore the Emperour of the Arrians sayd, That foure or fiue persons with their Athanasius, woulde trouble the peace of the world. To whom Liberius the Bishop of Rome answered, That his solitude or fewnesse did not any whit diminish the worde of faith. As for the declining estate of the Church, wee are giuen to wit, That when y  sonne of man shall come, before whose c??ming Antichrist shall seduce the world, Neque fides,  neque charitas inuenta erit in terra, and isti dies erunt tanqu?? dies Noah and Lot: There shall neither faith nor charity be found on the earth, and those dayes shal be as the daies of Noah and Lot, andc. The Eclipse then of this Moone shalbe as it were vniuersal, al the whole earth being put betweene y  Church and the sunne. And therefore if we shall finde no other direction in such darknes, then the multitude, we shall haue no part with that litle nomber. So much for multitude, whereof the Papists make great account. Nowe will I speake a litle of Succession, which you, my brethren, take to bee a very substantiall argument of the trueth. But Christ saith in the 23. of Matthewe, In cathedra Mosis sedent Scribae and Pharisaei: By order of Succession, the Scribes and Pharises sit in Moses chaire. Annas and Caiphas touching Succession, were aswel Bishops as Aaron and Eleazar. Of Succession S. Paul saith to the faithfull at Ephesus, Scio quod post discessum meum intrabunt lupi rapaces, ex vobis ipsis exurgent viri peruersa loquentes: I know that after my departure hence, rauening wolues shall enter and succeede mee, and out of yourselues there shall (by Succession) spring vp men speaking peruersly. Therfore S. Hierome saith, Non sanctorum filii sunt, qui tenent loca sanctorum: They bee not alwayes the children of holy men, that (by succession) haue the places of holy men. Notwithstanding the Pope himselfe will say, as it is before alledged, In Papasi desint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficiunt quae a loci praedecessore praestantur: If the Pope want good things by his own merits, the good thinges which hee hath (by Successi??) of Peter his predecessor, are sufficient. And the glose vpon Petrus fecit Papas haeredes bonitatis suae: Peter made y  Popes, heires of his goodnes by Succession. And againe, Papa recipit a cathedra sanctitat??. The Pope receiueth his holines by succession of his chaire. Such affiance sometime had y  Scribes and Pharises in their succession: therefore they sayde,  We are the children of Abraham. Vnto vs hath God made his promises: art thou greater then our father Abraham?  As for Christ, we know not from whence hee came, or what can he shewe for his succession? And when our Sauiour went about to reforme the abuses and errors, they sayde vnto him,  By what power doest thou these things? and who gaue thee this authoritie? where is thy succession? Vpon which wordes Beda saith,  Intelligi volunt diaboli esse quod fecit: They woulde haue the people vnderstand (for that he had no solemne succession) that al that he did was of the deuill.  And Cyrillus frameth their words in this sort, Tu ortus ex Iuda, commissos nobis fasces vsurpas:  Thou beeing of the tribe of Iuda, (and therefore hauing no right vnto the priesthoode) takest vpon thee the office that is committed vnto vs. Likewise Chrysostom imagineth y  Pharises thus to say,  Tu de sacerdotali familia natus non es, Senatus tibi hoc non concessit, Caesar non donauit: Thou art not of y  house of priests, the Councill hath not graunted it thee, the Emperour hath not giuen it thee. Thus to mainteine themselues in credit, (for that they had succession, and continuance from Aaron, and sate in Moses chaire) they kept Christ quite out of possession,  and sayd vnto him then, euen as you my brethren saye nowe vnto vs, Who euer taught vs this pernitious doctrine before? what ordinary succession of persons, and vocation haue we? what Bishop admitted vs? who confirmed vs?who allowed vs? Therefore (good christian hearers) let not these the Papistes great wordes much abash vs. The Scribes and Pharises in the like cases vsed the like language long ago. But let me aske you a question. Howe can you shewe any demonstration or probabilitie, that the succession of your church is lawfull? If there were any church that could alledge succession of persons, it were the church of the Iewes, for they were of the house of Aaron, from the father to the sonne, and besides them none might sacrifice. Moreouer to them it was promised, that they should continue so for euer. And in deed, when the Prophets exhorted them to reformation, they had no other thing in their mouth, but this, Lex a Sacerdote non peribit, neque consilium a sapiente, neque verbum a propheta: The lawe shall not perish from the priest; nor the counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. But the spirit of y  Lorde answered them, Quomodo dicitis, Sapi??tes sumus,  and lex Iehouae penes nos est? vtique ecce ad falsitat?? operatur stylus, ad falsitatem operantur legis periti: fecerúntne sapientes vt erubescerent? consternatíne sunt and capti? ecce verbum Iehouae spernunt, eccuius rei sapientia inesset eis? Howe say ye, We are wise, and the lawe of the Lord is with vs? For it is in vaine, that the pen is made, and that there is a scribe: wise men are confounded, and seeing that they haue reiected the worde of the Lord, what shalbe their wisdome any more? In like maner when the Iewes boasted to Iesus Christ, that they were of the seede of Abraham,  I know it wel (saith he) but the deuil is your father. And in very deede this successiue and hereditarie wisdome crucified Christ, and reiected saluation offred vnto them, as also this self same successi?? (although it be only pretended) worshippeth Antichrist, and interteyneth her owne perdition. Moreouer I demande what these alledgers of succession would haue answered to the Arrians, Samosetans, Nestorians, andc. who had their beginning continued from the first Bishops euen to themselues, and namely to Nestorius and Samosetanus, both which were lawfully called to y  patriarchal churches, the one to Constantinople, and the other to Antioch? Also, what will you answere to the succession alledged by al the Greeke and east churches? To be short, to the reformed churches of England, D??mark, Sweth??, a great part of Almaigne, through all which there is at this daye this succession from Bishop to bishop, from Pastor to Pastor? If you wil alledge the Popes succession, wee deny it you, and it is another question. If simply succession, you haue lost your cause. If your doctrine, then we gaine this poynt, y  the simple succession of persons without y  succession of doctrine, is nothing worth. With this sentence of Pope Adrian the fourth, I end to discourse any further of antiquitie of persons, Succedimus, non Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in parricidio: We succeede, not Peter in feeding, but Romulus in killing. And so is it truely: for you shall haue no Pope, that teacheth the people howe to liue in the true feare and loue of God, but such an one as persecuteth and killeth the Christians, that cherefully embrace, and comfortably receiue the glad tydinges of the Gospell. Thus being commanded to instruct the ignorant, and to feede them with the heauenly word of God, he practiseth tyrannie against them. Wherfore this is an euident signe (that if wee should seeme to grant, (which in no case is to be graunted) the succession of Peter vnto your Bishop of Rome) that he doeth farre degenerate from the diligence of Saint Peter, who had more care to saue soules, then to become riche and famous in the face of the earth: yea, to haue all men subiect vnto him, euen Emperours and kings to kisse his foote. Your Pope doeth alter from the doings of S. Peter, for Saint Peter neuer warranted to any man the possession of heauen for monies sake: but your Pope, like a good pedler, setteth all things to sale, and he that bringeth most, shal in heauen beare the greatest swaye. Wherefore these wordes of Baptista Mantuanus are true, speaking of the vnhappie state of Rome:— venalia nobisTempla, sacerdotes, altaria, Sacra, coronae,Ignis, thura, preces, coel?? est venale, Deus{que}:Amongst vs in Rome, churches, priestes, altars, masses, crownes, fire, incense, prayer, and heauen are set to sale, yea God himselfe amongst vs may be had for mony. Budaeus sayth, Sanctiones P??tificiae n?? moribus regendis vsui sunt, sed, (propemodum dixerim) argentariae faciendae autoritatem videntur accommodare: The Popes canons serue not nowe to guyde men’s liues, but, (if I may so say) they serue rather to make a banke, and to get money. Bernard of Clunice sayeth thus, Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus. Omnia Romae cum pretio: Rome giueth all things to them that giue all thinges. All things at Rome wil passe for money. Yea euen in the Popes own Decretals, you shall find it noted thus, in sexto de elect. and electi potestat. fundam??ta in margine, Roma est caput auaritiae, ideo omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the head of al couetousnes, and therfore al things there are set to sale. Yea Thomas Becket himself (whom you call a saint, (and whose festiual day about Christmas time you keepe with great solemnitie,  and a fewe of his bones you keep in such reuer??ce, y  God himselfe is not honored so much) wh?? for his wilfull disobedience, and treason c??mitted against his prince, he had fled for ayde and succour to Rome, and sawe that nothing woulde be wrought there without mony) wrote thus thereof to the Bishop of Menze, Mater Roma facta est meretrix, and prostituta est pro mercede: Rome our mother is become an harlot, and for money and meede layeth her selfe to sale. To be short, you know that our fathers long sithens were wont to say, Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana: The court of Rome wil not take the sheepe w out the fliece.  Christ sometime thrust such byers, sellers, brokers and coarsers out of the Temple: but contrariwise, you haue received in byers and sellers, and thrust out Christ, and so haue turned the house of God into a denne of theeues. Saint Paul sayth thus vnto the people of Ephesus, Argentum and aurum nullius concupiui: I haue desired no mans golde or siluer. Vpon which wordes, in the glose it is noted thus, Per hoc lupi cognoscuntur, qui talia concupiscunt: Hereby they y  desire such things, are knowne for wolues. Saint Hierome saith,  Quia Prophetae pecuniam accipiebant, prophetia eorum facta est diuinatio: For that the Prophets fel to taking of money, therfore their prophecy was become a soothsaying, that is to say, it was of the Deuill, and not of God. This I saye, that according to your dealing, hee that is poore, is not like to go to heauen, but y  rich is sure to be saued. Nowe you alledge succession of places, not farre vnlike to the Iewes, who will inclose orbem in vrbe, the whole worlde in one citie: but we see that God hath chosen many out of Ierusalem, and the Church is not tyed therunto, and God hath suffred by his righteous will, many Christi?? churches to be turned into the t??ples of the Turks, as that of Ephesus, founded by S. Paul, and S. Iohn, and that of Bonne in Barbarie, where Saint Austin preached, andc. And further it is sayde there expresly, Glossa communis in eum versiculum, Apocal. 12.8. andc. that y  Church of God for a long time, by reason of the persecution of Antichrist, shal retire herself into the wildernes, as the common glose it selfe doeth expounde. If euer there were church that might alledge succession of place, it was Ierusalem, for of it was said,  Dominus in hoc Templo in aeternum habitabit: The Lord wil euermore dwell in this house. Also,  Elegi ?…? hanc domum, vt nomen meum ?◊? in perpetuum maneat: I haue chosen this house, to the end that my name may dwell there for euer. And therefore the Priests had no other answere to al the Prophets that reprooued them, but this, Templum Domini,  Templum Domini: The Temple of the Lorde, the Temple of the Lorde. But see what the Lorde himselfe answereth vnto them, Ite (sayth he) ad locum meum in Shiloh, vbi habitauit nomen meum a principio, andc. Go, and see Shiloh, I haue chosen it from the beginning for my house: nowe see what I haue done vnto it for the wickednes of my people, I wil do euen so to the place, which I haue giuen vnto you, and to your fathers. But if you will that I dwell there, amend your wayes, and turne from your euil deedes. Now therefore I say, if God hath forsaken his owne Temple, for the iniquitie of the Priestes, euen then, when he had none besides erected in the whole worlde, must we tye our selues to the church of Rome, or to any other place, where all the clymates of the world are equally his temple? I can not but maruaile, why any of our country men shoulde take the church of Rome, to be the mother church of all churches, and the same to be an article of our faith. We are not expresly commanded by the word of God, to acknowledge y  church of Rome, Caput mundi, the head of the worlde: neyther is it expressed in holy scripture, that we are  condemned, if we beleeue not at all the traditions of men: but the Scripture manifestly doeth  forbid vs to beleue them. If you can find one only text of the scripture, that willeth and commandeth vs to beleeue in the Romane church, as hauing prerogatiue ouer all churches the world throughout, I will be on your side to y  death. But no such place, I am certain, you can shewe in the whole Bible, that the Romane church is y  holy Catholique Church, which all men (of what country soeuer they be) must acknowledge to be chiefest. It is not sufficient to claime succession of place, it behoueth vs rather to haue regard to the succession of doctrine.  Bernard sayth, Quid prodest, si canonice eligantur, and non canonice viuant? What auaileth it, if they be chos?? in order, and liue out of order? So sayeth Saint Augustine contra Donatistas,  Ipsum characterem multi lupi and lupis imprimunt: The outward marke, or right of a Bishoppe many giue to wolues, and be wolues them selues. Therefore the auncient father Ireneus giueth vs this good counsell, Eis qui sunt in ecclesia praesbyteris, obedire oportet, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis: qui cum episcopatus successione charisma veritatis certum, secundum beneplacitum patris acceperunt: It becommeth vs to obey those Priestes in the church, which haue their succession from the Apostles, and together with the succession of the Byshoprickes, according to the good wil of God the Father, haue received the vndoubted gyft of the trueth. Saint Cyprian being likewise charged for dissenting from his predecessours, answereth thus,  Si quis de antecessoribus meis non hoc obseruauit and tenuit, quod nos dominus exemplo and magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati eius venia concedi: nobis vero ignosci non potest, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus: If any of my predecessours haue not obserued and kept the same that our Lord hath taught vs both by his example and commandement, his simplicitie may be pardoned: but we (if we doe the like) can hope for no pardon, being now admonished and instructed of our Lorde. Compare y  vse and order of our churches (my brethr??) with y  Primitiue church of God, and you shall easely see the right of our succession. S. Cyprian sayeth, (ad Pompeium contra Epistolam Stephani) Si canalis aquae quae copiosè priùs and largiter profluebat, subitò deficiat, nonne ad fontem pergitur? andc. Hoc and nunc facere oportet Dei sacerdotes praecepta diuina seruantes, vt in aliquo si mutauerit and vacillauerit veritas, ad originem Dominicam and Euangelicam, atque Apostolicam traditionem reuertamur: and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde and ordo and origo surrexit: If the pipes of the conduyte, which before ranne with aboundance, happen to faile, doe wee not vse to search to the head? andc. The Priestes of God keeping Gods commandements, must doe the same: that if the trueth haue faynted or fayled in any point, wee returne to the very originall of our Lorde, and to the tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, that from thence wee maye take the discretion of our doings, from whence the order it selfe and originall first began. Thus much touching succession of place. Now I exhorte you brotherly to be reconciled to the true church of God, I meane the Church of England, wherein you finde not so many idolaters, Necromancers, heretikes, adulterers, Sodomites, churchrobbers, periured persons, mankillers, Runnagates, m??sters, Sicophants, Clawbacks, slaundering tongues, scribes and pharises, as you may easely finde in the church of Rome. Boast not of the succession of your Pope. S. Paul sayth,  Faith c??meth (not by succession, but) by hearing, and, hearing commeth (not of legacie or inheritance fr?? Bishop to Bishop, but) of the worde of God. They are not alwayes godly, that succeede the godly. Manasses succeeded Ezechias, and Ieroboam succeeded Dauid the Prophet. By succession, y  Turke this day possesseth and holdeth the foure great patriarchal Sees of the church, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Hierusalem.  By succession, Desolation shal sit in the holy place, and Antichrist shall preasse into y  roome of Christ. Thus much (welbeloued brethren) touching succession of place. Now I will speake a litle in confutation of your forged myracles, wherewith you seeke to oppugne the true church of Christ, and defende your wicked church of Antichrist, polluted with all maner of detestable idolatrie and cursed superstition. There are two maner of myracles,  the one true, the other false. Myracles are counted false, when either they be not that which they seeme to bee, or if they be, they are not supernatural, but are done by vertue of nature, and that, the Angels either good or bad, three maner of waies may bring to passe. For sometime the force of nature which they best know, they accommodate to the matter, of which coniunction with efficient causes folowe the effects, and that suddenly, which effectes are of the beholders, thought to bee myracles. The deuils know, that frogs, wormes, or serpents bee ingendred of putrefacted and rotten things, so that there be put heate in certain degrees, in consideration whereof, (seeing that it is not a hard thing for them to do these things which by nature maye bee wrought) it is y  easier to deceiue the weake of beliefe. And by this meanes S.  Augustine thought (as he writeth in his third booke of Trinity) Pharaos Magicians sometime to haue done the same. Moreouer the coniunctions of the spirits, of bloud and of humors, do much disquiet men’s bodies, from whence proceede thesights or visi??s of things, which are in those things conserued in y  same motion, before they come into the phantasie or imaginati??: and by  the same reason and order wherewith the spirit is troubled, it ioyneth them together, which thing appeareth in such as be Phrentique. Wee are not bound of necessitie to beleeue all such myracles whatsoeuer, without exception. Alexander of Hales sayeth, Par. 4. quaest. 53. Mem. 4. ar. 3. solut. 2. In sacramento apparet caro, interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica: In the Sacrament it selfe there appeareth flesh, sometyme by the conueyance of men, sometime by the woorking of the deuill. Likewise saith Nicholaus Lyra,  Aliquando in ecclesia fit maxima deceptio populi in miraculis factis a Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus propter lucrum: Sometime euen in the church the people are shamefully deceiued with feigned miracles, wrought either by the Priestes, or els by their companions for lucres sake. Miracles be not euermore vndouted proofes of true doctrine: therfore Saint Augustine saith vnto the Manichees, Miracula non facitis,  quae si faceretis, tamen ipsa in vobis caueremus: You woorke no myracles, and yet if you wrought any, at your hands we would take heede of them.  The Prophet Ieremie saith, Seduxerunt populum meum in mendaciis suis, and in miraculis suis: They haue deceiued my people by their lyes, and by their myracles. Aug. in Ioan. tract. 23.13. saith, Contra istos (vt sic loquar) mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus meus, dicens, In nouissimis temporibus exurgent pseudoprophetae, facientes signa and portenta, vt in errorem inducant (si fieri potest) etiam electos: praedixi vobis. Ergo cautos nos fecit sponsus, quia and miraculis decipi non debemus: My God hath warned me to beware of these myracle mongers, saying, In the last dayes shal rise vp false prophets, working signes and wonders, to y  end (if it be possible) to bring the elect into error: beholde, I haue forewarned you. Therfore y  bridegrome hath willed vs to beware, for we may not be deceiued, no not by miracles. S. Chrysost.  saith, In fine t??poris c??ced??da est potestas diabolo vt faciat signa vtilia, vt iam ministros Christi non per hoc cognoscamus, quia vtilia faci??t signa, sed quia omnino haec signa non faci??t: In y  end of time power must be granted to y  deuill to worke profitable miracles, y  then we c??not know y  ministers of Christ, by y  they worke profitable myracles, but by y  they worke no myracles at all. S. August. sayth, Non dicat, Ideo verum est, quia illa vel illa mirabilia fecit, vel iste vel ille, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant, and exaudiuntur: aut quia illa vel illa ibi contingunt, andc. Remoueantur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum: Let no man saye, Therefore it is true, for that this man or that man wrought this or that myracle, or for that men make their praiers at the tombes of our dead, and obteine their desires, or for that these miracles be wrought there, andc. Away with these things, they may be either the iuglings and mockeries of deceitfull men, or els illusions of lying spirits. Againe saint Chrysostome saith,  Per signa cognoscebatur qui essent veri Christiani, qui falsi: Nunc autem signorum operatio omninò leuata est, magis autem inueniuntur apud eos qui falsi sun Christiani: In olde tyme it was knowne by myracles, who were the true Christians, and who the false: but nowe the working of myracles is taken quite away, and is rather found among them that be false christians. Neither is the Gospel of Christ preached this daye vtterly without myracles. The blinde see, the dombe speake. Your idols are fallen. Your great Babylon is come to ground. These thinges my brethren, (if you haue eies to see) are no small miracles. Saynt Chrysost. sayth,  The conuersion of the worlde is a miracle. Saint Aug. De verbo Domini secund. Matth. Serm. 18. sayeth, Modo caro caeca non aperit oculos miraculo Domini, and cor caecum aperit oculos sermone Domini: Now a dayes the blind fleshe openeth not her eyes by the myracle of our Lorde, but the blinde heart openeth his eyes at the worde of our Lorde. And againe,  Modo aures corporis surdae non aperiuntur: sed quàm multi habent clausas aures cordis, quae tamen (verbo Dei penetrante) patescant. Nowe a dayes the deafe eares of the body be not opened: yet many they are, that haue the eares of their heart shut vp: which eares notwithstanding are opened by entring of the worde of God. Therefore I may rightly saye to you with other wordes of Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei,  Quisquis adhuc prodigia vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo credente non credit: Whosoeuer yet requireth myracles to bring him to the fayth, is himselfe a great myracle, who seeing that the world beleeueth, remayneth still in vnbeliefe.  Whereas the Pharises said of Christ, Let him now come downe from the crosse, and we wil beleeue him. Saint Hierome in Matth. 27. sayth vnto them, Etiamsi de cruce descenderet, similiter non crederetis: Yea, although he shoulde come downe from the crosse, yet would you not beleeue him. But it were a worlde to behold the glorious countenance of your myracles, your crosses can speak,  your idoles can goe, your images can light their own l??pes, your holy water is able to calme the sea, to chase away myce, and to make barren women to c??ceiue. If you doubt hereof, c??ferre with Master Cope,  whome (as I thinke) you knewe aliue, and were present at his burial at Rome in y  English Church: you knewe him a Canon of S. Peters church at Rome, and one whom Cardinal Hosius greatly esteemed. But now both Hosius and Cope are dead. Conferre also with that worthy Prelate the Bishop of Verona, your holy father Lypomanus. I am sory, welbeloued, that you are so readie to approue your myracles with false reas??s, and vnstable grounds: howbeit such religion, such myracles. Saint Hierom sayeth,  Mendacium Antichristi Christi veritas deuorabit: The trueth of Christ shall deuoure and consume the falsehood of Antichrist. The heathen had their deuilish myracles in the temple of their false gods, and in effect true, as may appeare by all their histories. Reade Titus Liuius in many places.  Simon Magus, who would be acknowledged as Christ, wrought miracles. So much touching your miracles. Touching reuelations and visions, which are a kind of myracles, wee haue the playne text which decideth this matter: Cum surgens in medio tui Propheta, somnians somnium, ediderit tibi signum aut prodigium, (quamuis eueniat signum illud aut prodigi??, quod praedixerat tibi) dicendo, Sequamur deos alienos, quos non noueras, and colamus eos, andc. If there shall arise (sayeth the Lorde in Deut. 13.) amiddest thee a Prophet or a dreamer of dreames, and that the signe or myracle which he hath tolde thee come to passe, and thereupon woulde turne thee away to strange gods, andc. thou shalt not heare him, andc. There are then both Prophets and visions true in effect, and yet false in their ende, and the tryall of them (as wee may see by this text) is the doctrine. Likewyse when Saynt Iohn (to the ende to keepe vs from false prophets) exhorteth vs to proue the spirits,  and by and by he addeth, Hereby shal you know the spirit of God, Euery spirite that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in y  flesh, is of God, andc. that is to say, Proue the spirits by the doctrine which they preach. Therefore Saul and Caiaphas haue prophecied, but (as Saynt Augustine sayeth) as Balaams asse once spake,  and yet for all that, they might haue once spoken the trueth: for the deuill himself (to colour his lying) sometimes speaketh the trueth. Howe weake (my brethren) your reuelations be, and howe small credit ought to be giuen therunto, there is no man but shoulde know. At Rome you haue them that receiue reuelations daily, as for example: A poore man there is in the citie of Rome (of whome I doubt not but you haue heard) who maketh men beleeue, that our blessed Lady, with her garde of heauenly mayds, saluteth him, and hath conference with him dayly. This man is no otherwise then a Saynt counted among the Iesuits. The Pope hath him to pray for him, the people regard him as a holy holy man. This man helpeth the citizens, to bring the wood from Tyber syde to their houses: of his gaine hee reserueth nothing else, but y  which is suffici??t for meat, drink and cloth: y  rest he giueth to y  poore. Father Hieronimus Iesuite, repetitour of the Logici??s in the English Seminarie at Rome, reported that there was there dwelling, an old woman (I wil not otherwise cal her, for I deale gently and mildely w  you) which would (as he sayd) tell him euery thing that hee had done in his life time, and when he came to her house at any time, she would tell one of her maydes (not hauing seen him) that there was such a felowe comming vnto her house. She also foretolde him, y  he shoulde become a Iesuite. Hee reported in like wise, how y  Pope in diuers matters c??sulted w  her. He praised this wom?? out of measure, and sayd how she was greatly in fauor with God, who reuealed such hidd?? and secret mysteries vnto her. He c??mended thereby the happie state of Rome, that there shoulde be such in y  city, as were worthy to receiue these reuelati??s and visions: he counted her a Saint. No dout, if one y  I knew at Cowbridge in Wales, in the Towne where I was borne, had bene there, they would haue taken him as a Saint, and familiar felowe with Christ. For, (wh?? he was aliue, as he wandred the country) he made men beleeue, y  he woulde tell them their fortune, what thinges had before chaunced in their time, and thinges that shoulde happen afterwardes euen vnto their dying day. But this man (as he was wont to saye) tooke his reuelations fr?? the Pharies: But the Romanists affirme, that their reuelations come from God, or from some Angell or Saint of heauen, where as in very deede, if a man had the straight examination of them, I am perswaded they would confesse, that they haue their reuelations from the Phairies, or fr?? the deuill, as the other had, whereof mention is made. Moreouer, there was a rich man in Lombardy, that had y  like reuelations, but farre more excellent then the other: vpon consideration whereof hee solde all that he had, and gaue it to the poore frankly. For it was reuealed vnto him in a vision by Christ and his Apostles, and the same also confirmed with the bodyly presence of our blessed Lady, that he should be Pope of Rome, and should tr??slate the See of Rome into the citie of Hierusalem. This man, not able to reade, presumed to preach, and gathered vnto him twelue Apostles, who (at his c??mandement) preached in likewise. They had many folowers, and such as beleeued him, so much the sooner, for that he told them, that hee had received a reuelation. He was presented before Cardinall Bromeo Cardinal of Milaine, who examined him: and when he had tolde this vision, he was dismist, and sette at libertie. They counted not this man an heretique, for crediting such false reuelations, making himselfe Christ, and choosing to him self twelue Apostles. Oh my brethren, deceyue not your selues, and seeke not to deceyue others that meane you no hurt. It is but in vaine to swim against y  streame. It is not wisdome to mainteyne an error know??. I am sure your consciences are burnt with hoate yrons, speaking and maynteyning lyes in hypocrisie. Oh giue not your selues ouer into reprobate and wilful mindes, despise not the wisdome of God within your selues. Seeke not to be offensiue and grieuous to any which bee of the Church of Christe. Doe what you can, Gods trueth is mightie, and shall preuayle. Dagon shal fal down headl??g before the Arke, the darknes shal flee before the light, and the more fiercely m??s wisedome shall withstande, the more glorious shal God be in his victorie: the more you doe falsely slaunder the faithfull and true meaning ministers of God, the greater shal their reward bee in the heauenly kingdom of Christ. If you take my conuersion to the true church, to be outwardly and not inwardly, and the same to be spotted with hypocrisie, I may bee sorye, not for my selfe, (as though I were such a one as you take mee to be, for GOD knowth it is nothing so, his name be praised therefore:) but for your rashnesse in iudging that which you know not. It is God that is the searcher of men’s hearts, and none other. If I recanted, eyther for feare of punishment, or for prefermentes sake, you mought count me then (if it were so, as it is not) to be farre worse then a Turke or Pagan, who neuer received the trueth. Howe can I be a Protestant outwardly, and a Papist in heart, with a minde to be saued? You know, that according to your owne papisticall lawes, no man dare in c??mon assembly deny the Popes authoritie, and afterwardes to name himself the member of that church of Rome. I am sure that no man is a true christian, which with his lippes doeth professe Christ, and with his heart doeth flatly denye him. As I doe acknowledge that there is a God, a Trinitie in vnitie to be woorshipped, who hath most gloriously beautified the heauens, most plentifully enriched the earth, most Angelically created man, who hath ordeyned the heauen to mayntaine life and light, the earth to succour and sustaine nature, all creatures liuing in land and water, to supply his wants, nothing to be reckened and named, which he hath not most liberally giuen vnto man, as appointing him lord and soueraigne, but them his vessels and seruants. Against hunger, (lest we shoulde famish) he hath prouided nourishment, against thirst, (lest we shoulde perish) he hath ordayned sauoury liquors. Against colde, (lest we should die in our nakednesse) he hath giuen vs clothing. As I acknowledge the omnipotencie of God, and confesse the vnmeasurable greatnesse of his goodnes and loue towardes man: so do I verily, from the very bottome of my heart, detest your Popish religion, and embrace the vndefiled trueth of Christes Gospell. I cal God to witnesse, that what I haue already spoken with my lippes, that doe I establish in my minde. I beseech you all, (such as haue forsaken the Pope) sometimes to praye for mee, that it would please God to make me a profitable member of his church, and stedfast in the faith of Iesus Christ, euen vnto y  end of my life. So much for Antiquitie, Multitude, succession of persons or place, miracles and reuelations. God of his mercy graunt you, my brethren, true repentance. Nowe good Christian audience, and welbeloued brethren, I will speake a worde or two touching the images, which Papistes allow, and haue in their churches. The scriptures in sundry places plainely forbid any image to bee made. The Lorde warned the people of Israel,  that they should rem??ber that they sawe no image in the day that y  Lord spake vnto them in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire.  And in Isaiah, Cui assimilabitis Deum, aut qua similitudine illum exprimetis? To whome then wil you liken God, or what similitude will you sette vp vnto him? And againe, the Lorde confirmeth the same,  saying, Quis audebit effingere Deum, aut fusile aut sculptile facile, quod nihil prodest? Who hath made a god, or molten an image, that is profitable for nothing? Beholde, all they that are of the fellowship thereof, shal be confounded, for the workmen themselues are men: let them all be gathered together, and stande vp, yet they shal feare, and be confounded together. I can not a litle maruayle, that among you, my brethren, (I meane the Papistes) that Dominicke Asotus, writing vpon the Epistle to the Romanes, the first chapter,  durst so boldly affirme, that in the same comm??dement of God, the Christi??s were not forbidden to make images, representing the fourme of man: for (sayde hee) the lawe there onely maketh mention of birdes, of fourefooted beastes, and of creeping wormes, whereas in very deede they are strayghtly charged not to make the images of male or female. Moreouer it is expressed in the Psalme,  Os habent, and non loquuntur, pedes habent, and non ambulant, aures hab??t, and non audiunt, nares, and non odorantur: They haue a mouth, and speake not, they haue feete, and walke not, they haue eares, and heare not, they haue noses, and smell not. The Carpenter is blamed in Isaiah,  which of one part of the hewen tree, maketh an image, of the other parte he maketh fire, and vpon the same he baketh bread, he carueth and laboureth much, that he may expresse the similitude of a man. By all these places it doeth manifestly appeare, that the images of men are vtterly forbidden, which are instituted to a religious end: And yet you (though you know that all maner worshipping of images is forbidden by expresse testimonies of the holy scripture) must haue them forsooth, (as you say) for bookes vnto such as can not reade. What thinke you in making the image of God the father, and God the holy Ghost? You know God is a Spirite:  whereof it followeth, that you can not expresse his forme, with lineaments, with paintings and colours. It is writt??,  that no m?? hath euer seene God. Why then, if he can not be seene, or if he possesse inaccessible light, howe can he be pictured? or howe should a picture make him to bee seene? Moreouer, God is vnmeasurable and infinite, but the thinges which are paynted, grauen, or molten, are measurable and finite. Likewise, Images are made of men, that the absent, after a maner may be thought present: but God is euery where, neyther is he absent from any thing. It is written in the Psalme,  Si ascendero in coelum, tu illic es. Therefore it behooueth vs, not to make God present, with images, seeing he is alwaies present, and to al men. The image should with apt similitude expresse y  which is to be represented. Howe doeth the image of God the father rightly and truly represent him, whereas he hath no beginning? The images are made by man, and haue a beginning. Who can set forth the quantitie of God and his wonderfull woorkes, howe he is neuer idle, but euermore doing that which tendeth to the saluation of man? Contrariwise, images sleepe, and doe nothing at all. Moreouer God is altogether wisedome and knowledge: whereas your images feele nothing, and vnderstande as much. Saint Paul sayeth,  that we must not thinke the Godhead to be like golde or siluer, or stone grauen by arte. God that made the worlde and all thinges therein,  seeyng that he is Lorde of heauen and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with handes, neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giueth to all life and breath, and all things. Fortunate doe I thinke those stones to be, whereof images are made, and put vpon your popish altars, because they are had in such reuerence and honor amongst you, whereas other stones not vnlike vnto th??, lye in y  streetes, are troden with feete, and spet vpon.  You obiect vnto vs the authoritie of the Scriptures, and say, It is lawfull to paint God in the forme of man: which you seeke to proue by the vii. of Daniel,  I behelde (sayeth the Prophet) till the thrones were set vpon, and the ancient of dayes did sitte, whose garment was white as snowe, and the heares of his head like y  pure wooll, his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles as burning fyre. In Ezechiel, speaking of God,  is expressed the figure of man. Isaiah sayeth,  that he sawe God sitting vpon a Throne. Moses also with the Seniours sawe God, when hee sate in his Throne or tribunal seate.  And in the mount he sawe God in the forme of man departing. Seeing these things nowe vttered were seene of the Prophets, why then is it vnlawfull for vs to paint God with colours and karuing? [Answere.] I answere thus vnto your obiection, The diuersitie of bodily members, which is ascribed vnto God in the holy Bible, hath shewed in a mysterie, that the Diuine nature should take vp?? it y  humane nature, and likewise it signified mystically, that God should take vpon him fleshe, and become man. Yea (to let this answere goe) I say, it was the goodnesse of God, wherewith he so applyed himself vnto our infirmity, that whereas we could not vnderstand his nature, GOD appeared so in the sight of man, as though hee had bene man himselfe. By his eyes hee described prouidence, by his armes, strength, by his handes, workemanshippe, by his nostrelles, wrath, and many things of like sorte. And whereas you say that it is lawfull for vs (for the expressing of God) to vse the like lineaments, colours, and caruings, it followeth not. To GOD there is no lawe giuen which hee ought to obserue, neyther are all thinges lawfull to men, which he iustly and rightly hath done.  God reuengeth him on his enemies,  hee giueth commaundement to the father to kill his sonne,  and he willeth the Hebrues to take with th?? the goods of the Egyptians: which thinges if men should doe or commaund, they could not cleare themselues of a great offence, committed against God. The Lorde hath deliuered a law to men, and to himself hath hee giuen no lawe: for seeing that hee is the Authour of the lawe, hee may thereof except what he lyst. Wherefore it is to be graunted, that hee hath done nothing without consideration and infinite iudgement. I woulde gladly bee briefe: therefore I refer you to the chapters which speake against Images. Reade Exod. 20.4. Leui. 9.4. Num. 33.52. Deut. 4.15. Psal. 115.4. Psal. 135. Esa. 40.18. Ierem. 10.5. Ezech. 6.6. Heb. 2.18. Wis. 13.10. Baruc. 6. Act. 17.42. Rom. 14.3. 1. Cor. 5.11. 1. Cor. 6.6. Gal. 5.19. Iohn 4.5, 21. You see, my brethren, in howe many places the scripture doeth forbid vs to haue images, yet you will haue them, though God say nay, if your holy father the Pope doth allow them. Let vs see now what the auncient Doctors and graue fathers haue sayd by your images.  Tertulli?? in his booke of Idolatrie, sayeth, God hath forbidden an image as well to bee made, as to be worshipped. As far as making goeth before worshipping, so farre is it before that the thing be not made, that may not be worshipped. Some man will saye, I make it, but I worship it not, as though hee durst not worshippe it for any other cause, but onely for that same cause, for which he ought not to make it: I meane, both wayes procure Gods displeasure. Nay rather thou worshippest y  image, thou giuest the cause to other to worshippe it. Some one or other that maintaine idolatrie, wil say, And why then did Moses make the image of the brasen Serpent in the wildernesse?  The olde idolaters founde out and vsed the same, aboue fourteene hundreth yeres agoe. One and the same God, hath by his generall Lawe both forbidden any image to be made, and also by his extraordinarie and speciall commandement he hath bidden an image of the serpent to be made. If thou be obedient to the same God, thou hast his Lawe, Make y  no image: but if thou haue a regard to the image of the Serpent that was made afterwarde by Moses, then doe thou as Moses did, Make not any image against the law, vnlesse God commaunde thee, as hee did Moses.  Origen sayth, We make no image of God, as knowing him to be inuisible, and w out bodie. Againe he sayeth,  The minde of the Lawe was this, that they shoulde in all thinges so behaue themselues, as the trueth required, and that they shoulde beside the trueth, counterfeite nothing, representing the shape of a man or woman.  Cyprian sayth, Images were first drawen, thereby to keepe the countenance of the dead in remembrance, vpon occasion whereof, thinges grewe at length vnto holinesse, that at the first were taken onely for solace. Againe,  what doest thou bowe thy captiue bodie before foolish images, and earthly counterfaites? God hath made thee vpright: and whereas all the beasts of the earth are depressed in shape, bending downe to the groundward, thou hast a loftie state towardes heauen, and to God thy countenance is erected. Then looke vp thither, thither cast vp thine eies, seeke God aboue, that thou maist want hell belowe: lift vp thy doubtfull heart to hygh and heauenly thinges. What doest thou throwe thy selfe with the deuill, whome thou seruest, into the pit of death? Clement sayth,  The deuill by the mouth of other, is w??t to bring forth such words, We to the worship of the inuisible God, worship the visible images. And this is most certeinly false. For if you will truely worship Gods Image, you should (by being beneficial vnto man) worship the true image of God in him. What honour of God is this, to runne about the counterfeites of timber and of stone? and to worship the shapes that are without soule, and despise man, in whom is the true shape of God? Arnobius in his eight bookes against y  G??tiles: We neither worship, nor wish for crosses: you that consecrate wodden gods, peraduenture worship your wodden crosses, as partes of your gods. If you had not this image, should Christ be ignorant that he were serued of you? Will you thinke that there is no honor done him? Then doeth he receyue your seruings and worshippines by certaine traynes, by other put in trust, and before he, to whome the worship is due, haue any feeling of the matter, you doe your sacrifice vnto the image, and send him but the scrappes from another mans boorde. And what can be deuised more iniurious, slaunderous, and vncourteous, then to acknowledge one God, and make thy sute to any other thing? to hope for helpe of God, and powre out thy prayers to a senselesse image? Is not this (as the Prouerbe sayth) to haue a quarrell to Alfonsus, and fight with Ferdinando? and where thou seekest for aduise of men, to aske the sentence first of porkelings, and of asses? Is not this an errour? Is it not properly a madnes, in trembling wise to make thy humble sute to a thing that thou madest thy self? And whereas thou doest know, and art assured, that it is thine owne workemanship, the fruites of thine owne fingers, to fall groueling vpon thy face before it? Very children know, that your images haue eyes, and see not, mouthes and speake not. Wherefore then doeth the holy Ghost so often teach vs, and admonish vs the same thing in the Scriptures, as if we knewe it not? For that the very shape and proportion of a man set aloft, after it once beginneth to bee adored and honoured of the multitude, it breedeth in euery man that most vile affection of error, that although he find there no naturall mouing or token of life, yet he thinketh some god or godly thing is within it, and so being deceyued, partly by the forme that he seeth, and partly by the waye of authoritie and credite of the authors and makers of it, whome they take to be wise, and partly also by the example and deuotion of the people, /whome they see obedient to the same, he thinketh that the image being so like a liuing bodie, c?? not be without some liuing thing vnderneath it. Lact. sayeth in plaine wordes, Non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachr?? est: Out of all doubt, there is no religion, wheresoeuer there is an Image. S. Aug. speaking of the image of God the Father, sayeth thus, Tale simulachrum Deo fingere, nefarium est: To deuise such an Image of God, it is abominable. Theodorus the Bishop of Ancyra saith, Sanctorum imagines and species ex materialibus coloribus formari minimè decor?? putamus: manifestum enim est, quod vana sit huiusmodi cogitatio, and diabolicae deceptionis inuentum: We thinke it not conuenient, to paynt the images of saintes w  materiall or earthly colours: for it is euident, y  it is a vayne imagination, and the procurement of y  deceytfulnes of the deuil. To like purpose writeth Epiphanius, Estote memores dilecti filii, nec in ecclesias imagines inferatis, neque in Sanctor?? coemiteriis eas statuatis, sed perpetuò circumferte Deum in cordibus vestris. Quin etiam neque in domo communi tolerentur. Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis: My dear childr??, be ye mindful, that you bring no images into the churches, and that you erect vp none at the burials of the Saints, but euermore cary God in your hearts, nay, suffer no images to be,  no not in your priuate houses. For it is not lawfull to leade a Christian man by his eyes, but rather by y  studie or exercise of his minde. For this cause Epiphanius sayth, The superstition of images is vnfit for y  church of Christ. It is a worlde to see, how welfauouredly, and howe towardly touching religi??, these men agree with the fathers, of whom they vse to vaunt. They bee your owne good, and yet you see, how they speake against your images. If time should permit, I were able to recite many such places out of the fathers, in confutation of your worshipping such vaine images. You doe not onely allowe images to be had in churches, but also you cause them to be deuoutly and reuerently honoured, and that with the same honour that is due to God himselfe. One of the Bishops of the council of Nice sayth, Venerandas imagines recipio and adoro, and id perpetuò docebo: I receiue and worship y  reuer??t images, and this wil I teach. Another saith, Sacras imagines perfectè adoro. Qui verò secus confit??tur, eos anathematizo. I do perfectly adore the holy images, and I accurse all them that hold the contrary. Another saith, Non sunt duae adorationes, sed vna, ipsius imaginis, and primi exemplaris, cuius est imago: There be not two kynds of adoration, but one, which is as well due to the image, as to the paterne of the image. Saint Augustine sayth, Sic omninò errare meruerunt,  qui Christum and Apostolos eius non in sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt, nec mirum, si a pingentibus fingentes decepti sunt: So were they worthy to bee deceiued, that sought Christ and his Apostles, not in the bookes of holy Scripture, but in paynted walles. Neither may one maruaile, if the feyners by Paynters were deceiued.  The old father Epiphanius sayth, It is a horrible wickednes, and a sinne not to be suffered, for any man to set vp any picture in the church of the christians, yea though it were the picture of Christ himselfe: yet you store all your Temples, and eche corner of them with paynted and carued images, as though without them religion were nothing worth. Thus (good brethr??) you see both scriptures and fathers against you. Forsake then your worshipping of images. Nowe will I speake a litle, after what maner they worship images at Rome. I haue seene, and so haue you, that on euery altar in Rome, there are set vp either Idols or images. In S. Peters church, they haue the image of S. Peter in brasse, holding out his finger to blesse them as they passe by: before the which image the people fall downe, and make their prayers vnto it, kisse his foote, and touch it with their Beades. I would aske you once again, why they paynt God the Father, and God y  holy Ghost. Euen because lay men (when they see God to haue a body) shoulde thinke God the father, and God the holy Ghost to be men, as we be. Their priests in Italie for the most parte are altogether vnlearned. I demanded of some of these Italian priestes in the Italian tongue, whether God the father and God the holy Ghost had bodies. They answered, Yea. Wel then, seeing their priests are ignorant in these thinges, you may perswade your selues that the simple countrymen are likewise ignorant. Father Pais reader of scholasticall diuinitie at Rome, in the Romane colledge (beeing demanded of Doctor Allen) whether it was as lawfull to worship the thing that represented, as well as the thing that was represented by the Image: This graue and learned Father answered, it was lawfull to worship the tymber, whereof the Image was made. If this be not idolatrie, that a m?? should worship that thing which is more fit for the fire or for some other purpose, then to be worshipped, th?? there is no idolatrie worthy to be named at al. Thus much briefly touching images. God giue you a heart to conceiue the trueth. You worship y  pillar vpon the which the cock crew, wh?? Peter denyed his master Christe. Why do you thus? What, doe you make the cocke a saint? The Romanes haue made them a cratch or manger, representing the oxe and the asse, and also the byrth of Christ, to the which workmanshippe of man, they fal down and worship. Can you shewe me a reason, why you shoulde kneele before these stones, or why you shoulde kisse them, and touch them with your beades? What, haue you canonized the oxe and the asse Saints, and doe you saye in your Letanies, Sancte bos, and Sancte Asine orate pro nobis: Saint oxe and Saint Asse, pray for vs? Why do ye worship the thirty pence, which Iudas tooke to betray his master Christ? What, doe you count the thirty pence holy Reliques, for y  Iudas had them, or for that they came from y  chief priests? What, do you make Iudas the traytour a Saint, or y  chiefe priests of the Scribes and Pharises holy m??? The reliques of Saints are worshipped, as bones andc. they fall downe likewise on their knees before them, they crye vnto them, they touch the boxe with their beades, they see not the bones being wrapped in silke, and put in a boxe, or in the altar, in boards, or in Christal. The beades touch not the bones, but the outward boxe. The priest may beguyle the people, putting in the boxe the bones of a dead horse, or the head of a foxe, in stead of y  Saints bones: for the people seeth not what is in the boxe, or wrapped in silkes. Why doe the poore men for their asses bring offrings to stations, as candels, torches, and such like? And why do the poore Romanes bring their asses to Churches, and cause the priestes to say a fewe prayers ouer them, and sprinkle holy water vp?? th??? Belike, they thinke to get a roome or place in heauen for them, and s to ryde vpon Asses in heauen, or else to get indulgences of the Pope for their asses. In deede they are (as the Prophet Dauid sayth) sicut equus and mula quibus non est intellectus:  They are like horse and mule, who haue no vnderstanding. If I should recite all those Idolatrous practises, which I haue seene at Rome, a whole day were not sufficient to tell them: but by these few things layd downe, you may gather the rest to be as bad, or rather worse. Now I will speake a litle of the wickednesse of Rome, which you count holinesse, and make our Englishmen that were neuer there, beleeue so. First I wil begin with your Cardinals, the pillars of your Church. Haue they not beautifull boyes, with whom they commit the sinne of Sodom,  as I haue heard by the Romanes, and by a Gentleman who serued to Cardinal Sforsie, who trauayled by land with me, from the citie Ancona to Venice? Haue not these yong Cardinalles pretie wenches in their palaces, whom in the day time they cal either their sisters or cousins, and in y  night time make them either their bedfelowes or c??cubines? And do you not know, howe that there was a yong Cardinall a Prince, burnt at Rome not long since, by a common queane of the stewes, and toke from her the french disease, wherwith he dyed miserably? Do not your priests at Rome, without shame and punishment, openly in the sight of all men goe to the stewes? I haue seene them with mine eies, (as I walked y  streets) embracing the Queanes. O if a minister heere in England should commit such abomination, and scape vnpunished, howe woulde you cry out against him and against the Magistrates! Yet to see your owne priests so to doe, and your Magistrates to suffer it, you holde your peace, you seeme to allowe it. What shall I speake of your Monkes? Was there not at Rome a whole monastery of such as beare a siluer crosse in their hands, and are apparelled in blewe, full of women, that went in habit of those monkes, and were theynot spied at the last, and escaped vnpunished? Be these the holy m?? that haue renounced the world, and haue vowed chastitie? Now of the lay men, because I will not stand to discourse vpon euery thing that I recite. How doe the citizens liue? Was there not lately a great rich citizen, that had a place to the which resorted many yong Romane Gentlemen, who committed the sinne of Sodom one with another, and were they not spyed out at the last, and did not they all scape punishment, except one poore man which dyed for all? And did not the Romanes saye, that he dyed wrongfully, for that the sinne of Sodom was but a tricke of youth? Count you me that a light off??ce,  that cryeth vp to heauen to God for vengeance? Moreouer, haue not y  Romanes sixe streetes full of Curtizants, and harlots, who pay a yeerely tribute to the Pope? And be there not throughout al Rome Queanes, who lay out of their windowes carpets, and their gownes, which is a signe to them that passe by, that there they may haue a woman for money? At Shrouetide, what horrible abuses are there practised at Rome without punishment! Doe not men go in women’s apparell, and women in men’s apparell? The Gentlewomen out of their windowes throwe rosewater, which is a token to them that passe by, that there they may defile their bodyes one with another. What murther is there, insomuch, that no m?? can sit in his wagon without daunger of his life? These words of Petrus Bembus are true, Roma est sentina pessimorum hominum: Rome is the sinke of pestilent varlets. I would not for a great deale of money, but that Ihad seene Rome: otherwise I should haue stood in doubt, lest I had misreported ought of them, but what I sawe, y  speake I, and testifie, and cry with Mantuan,Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma:Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum:Ye y  desire to liue godly, depart fr?? Rome: for when al things are lawful there, it is not lawful to be honest. Peraduenture nowe, you wil say y  the Pope is a holy man. Although I am indebted vnto him 50. or 60. li. in money, yet wil I not, neither can I but speake the trueth of him, vnlesse I should sinne, (which God forbid.) Hath not this Pope, at his hauen citie Ancona, prised and taken away the marchandize of the Turkes marchants, for that one of the Turks had offended one of his seruants? The Pope perceiuing the marchandize to bee of great valewe, tooke an occasion thereby to depriue y  marchants of their marchandize. The emperour of the Turks wrote a letter to y  Pope, desiring him to restore the goods againe to his marchants: y  Pope refused so to doe. Wherefore the Christian marchants were in like sort dealt withal at Constantinople. At Macerata, the Pope put a County out of his possession, and gaue it to his own sonne Iames, whom (of a begger) he hath made a Marques, able to spend by the yeere, thirty thousande crownes, and is richly maried to a Dukes daughter: He gaue the countie for his possession, not halfe so much as it was worth. There was also a monke, who came from the Indians, who at Venice refused a hundred thousand crownes, for two precious stones which hee brought with him, who thinking to please this Pope now liuing, and to get a greater rewarde, presented the precious stones before this Pope Gregorie, who taking the gemmes or precious stones, in steade of reward, committed the M??ke to pris??, alledging nothing against him but this, that hee forsooke his cloyster, or monasterie. Master Alet (whom you know) hath reported this to bee true: for he knewe this sayd Monke, as he reported to two Gentlemen of y  North that had byn at Hierusalem, and to mee, and to three other scholers. Thus much touching his iniquitie. Nowe I will not speake of the Popes pontificalitie, howe hee is caryed on men’s shoulders, how the people kneele before him, howe the trumpets sound, how y  ordin??ce or double canons are discharged, and howe the people cry out, Viuat papa Gregorius: (Let our dissembling Antichrist) Let Pope Gregory liue and reigne ouer vs. You faine (my brethren) y  there is a purging place for the soules after this life, wherein they abide and suffer the selfe same punishment which is in hell, and are in no better case (to speake of the torments) then they of hel. But herein they are farre happier then the damned, for that they of purgatory are sure to be saued, and they of hell, are sure neuer to finde end of their miserable condition. You say, that such as be in purgatorie, may be released, and deliuered to heauen, by the praiers and dirges of such as be on earth. That there is such a place named as Purgatorie, you seeke to proue by the Scriptures. First out of y  booke of y  Maccabees, where it is read, that good and profitable it was to pray for the dead. From hence you go to Zacharie the Prophet, where it is said in the ninth chapter, Eduxisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non erat aqua: Thou hast deliuered thy prisoners out of the dungeon wherein there was no water. Also in Ecclesiastes the 4. De carcere atque catenis interdum quis progreditur ad regnum? Who at any time commeth from pris??, and fr?? fetters vnto the Crowne? You alledge the Psalme, Transiuimus per ignem and aquam, nosque in refrigerium eduxisti: We haue passed both fire and water, and thou hast brought vs to a refreshing place. Out of the newe Testament you bring this place, where it is said, that the sinne of the holy Ghost is not forgiuen, neither in this worlde, neither in the world to come. Ergo (say you) in this life sinnes are forgiuen, and also in the life to come. And out of Saint Matthewe you obiect, Take him, and binde him hand and foote, and cast him into vtter darkenes, and there let him stay vntill hee hath payde the vttermost peny. Ergo (say you) he meaneth Purgatorie. Also you obiect the historie of Lazarus and the rich glutton. You alledge moreouer this place of the Apocalypse, where it is sayd, that nothing impure and defiled with sinne, shall bee admitted to that holy citie of the Lorde. And you thinke that these wordes of S. Paul doe serue to your purpose, that al knees must bowe to God, that be in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth. Finally, you bring foorth this place of the Apocalypse, that euery creature in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth giueth prayses vnto the Lord. You thinke that these, and such like places of Scripture doe make greatly for your purpose. But it is known, that amongst you Papists there be diuers opini??s touching purgatorie. Some say that it is a true opinion, and an article of our fayth, to teach, and beleeue, that there is a purgatory: Others there be, who not so firmely and constantly affirme the same, but they either suspect, or thinke y  there is such a place. First, I will shewe, that Purgatorie belongeth not to any article of our faith, neither is it a necessarie thing to bee credited. Secondly, I will declare, whether the suspition and opinion of purgatory standeth with reason, and is iust. I answere vnto them, which say it is a necessary opinion, and an article of our fayth, to acknowledge that there is a purgatorie: If it were a certaine and firme article of our faith, it should then most euidently so appeare out of the testimonies of the scriptures. For we do not descend into their sent??ce, which be fathers, or will make men the authors of the matters of religion. It should be a reproch vnto the holy Ghost, if we should perswade our selues, that whatsoeuer they write, doth tend to our saluation, and that the saluation of our soules doeth stand vpon their wordes. What thing soeuer apperteyneth to our saluation, the same by the vertue of the holy Ghost is expressed in the Scriptures. Saint Paul to Timothie saith,  that the whole scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to conuince, to correct and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good woorkes. If you doe contende to set foorth any good woorke, or any thing necessary to be credited, which may not be confirmed by the scriptures, I would take that to be neither good, nor profitable, if the Scriptures doe not plainly allow the same. We must not beleeue your wordes to bee true, whereas you say, The Apostles haue not taught all things, which touch the saluati?? of man. This wil I graunt in politicall, but not in spiritual matters, that it should be true, which you saye, that all things are not conteyned in Scriptures, which belong to the gouernement of a common weale. But to proue that y  scriptures wrote sufficiently touching our soules health,  Tertullian in libro de praescript. sayth, Foelix ecclesia cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum sanguine profuderunt: Happy is that church which hath received the whole doctrine confirmed with the bloud of the Apostles. Our sauiour Christ saith, Quae audiui a patre meo, omnia feci nota vobis: Those things which I haue heard of my father, I haue reuealed vnto you. Moreouer, that I may returne to my matter, often it is doubted of Purgatory. The Greeke church in the councill of Florentine long stoode in doubt. And the common places of the scripture, which are brought foorth, to proue this opinion, let them expound them no otherwise then the proper and lawfull interpretation doeth require, and there shall then bee left no place to proue Purgatorie. Saint Cyprian in his first treatise against Demetrian saith thus, After we be once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repentance, there is no more effect or working of satisfaction, life is here either lost or wonne. Euerlasting saluation is here prouided for, by y  due worshipping of God and the fruites of fayth. Saint Augustine saieth, de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 13. Quidam nullas poenas nisi purgatorias volunt esse post mortem: Some men wil haue no punishment to be after death, but onely the paynes of Purgatory. Euen in Pauls time there were some,  that being aliue, were baptized for the dead. And by the Council of Carthage. 3. canon 6. it appeareth, there were some y  vsed to thrust the sacrament into the mouth of the dead body, meaning thereby (as it maye bee thought) to procure some reliefe of the soule: The words be these, Placuit vt corporibus defunctorum Eucharistia non detur.  Dictum est enim a domino, Accipite, and edite: Cadauera autem nec accipere possunt nec edere: We thinke it good, that the Sacrament be not giuen to the bodies of y  dead. For our Lorde sayeth, Take and eate: but dead bodies can neyther take, nor eate. These were auncient errours in olde time, as it is easie to be seene. As for the fantasie of purgatorie, it sprang first from the heathen, and was received amongst them in that time of darkenesse, long before the comming of Christ, as it may plainly appeare by Plato and Virgil. Plato in Timaeo. Virgil. Aeneid. 6. in whom you shal finde described at large, the whole common weale, and all the orders and degrees of Purgatorie. Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei, lib. 7. cap. 7. sayeth, The olde heathen Romanes had a sacrifice, which they called, Sacrum purgatorum: A purgatorie Sacrifice. You will say, The Apostles of Christ haue taught vs purgatorie, (not by any worde that euer they wrote, but) by traditi??. This is as true, as that S. Peter sayd Masse in Rome with a golden Cope, and a triple crowne, vnlesse perhaps some man will thinke, whereas S. Paul sayth, Homines priuati veritate, existim??tes quaestum esse pietatem: They be men voide of trueth, thinking that their gayne is godlinesse: or whereas Saint Peter sayth,  Per auaritiam fictis sermonibus negociantur de vobis: Through couetousnesse, by feyned talke, they make sale of you: that by these words, they gaue vs warning of the very fourme and doctrine of your purgatorie: for better authorities then these be y  I recken, you can lightly finde none. And whereas you tell vs out of some heathenish fantasie, that sinnes can not be washed away, but by long space of time, and payne in purgatory, Saint Cyprian saith, In eodem articulo temporis, cum iam anima festinet ad exitum, and egrediens ad labia expirantis emerserit, poenitenti?? clementissimi Dei benignitas non aspernatur, nec ser?? est, quod verum est: In that very moment of time, euen when the soule is ready to passe, and is euen at the lippes of the partie ready to yeelde vp the spirite, the goodnesse of our most mercifull God refuseth not repentance, and whatsoeuer is truely done, is neuer too late. Saint Chrysostome sayeth, Latro in cruce, neque vno die opus habebat. and quid dico vno die? Neque breui hora: tanta est Dei erga nos misericordia: The thiefe on the crosse needed not so much as one daye to repent himselfe. What speake I of one day? No, he needed not one houre: so great is the mercy of God toward vs. Saint August. Epist. 80. sayeth, If any man depart hence without rep??tance, Imparatum inueniet illum dies Domini, quem imparatum inuenerit suae vitae huius vltimus dies: Him shall the daye of the Lorde finde vnprouided, whom the last daye of this life findeth vnprouided. Saint Ambrose sayth in his booke de bono mortis, Qui hic non accipit remissionem peccatorum, ibi non erit: He that here in this life receiueth not remission of his sinnes, shal not be there. And S. Hierome in Lamentationes Ierem. lib. 1. cap. 1. Thou shalt not goe foorth thence, vntill thou haue payed y  last farthing, sayth thus, Significat semper non exitur?? esse, quia semper soluat nouissimum quadrantem, dum sempiternas poenas terrenorum peccatorum luit: Christes meaning is, y  he shal neuer come out, for that he must euermore paye the last farthing, whyles he suffereth euerlasting punishment for his sinnes committed in this worlde. So sayeth Saint August. de sermone Domini in monte, lib. 1. Donec soluas nouissimum quadrantem, miror, si non eam significat poenam quae vocatur aeterna: Vntill thou pay the last farthing, I maruaile, but it meaneth that payne, which is called euerlasting. Hereby, my brethren, I thinke it may partly appeare, that you maintaine your paynted fyre and paper walles, with painted authorities and paper reasons. Verely the Christian people of the East church of God, which sometime was as great and as famous as the Church of the West, notwithstanding they beleeued in God, and his Christ, and knewe there was both hell and heauen: yet in your Purgatory they had no skil. One of your Doctors saith, Alphonsus de haeresibus lib. 8. de indulgentiis. Vsque in hodiern?? diem Purgatorium non est a Graecis credit??: Vntil this day, of the Grecians, or of the East church, Purgatory was neuer beleued. Therfore you can not iustly say, y  your fantasie herein was euermore accompted vniuersal, or catholique. Augustine in Psal. 85. in deede sometime sayeth, There is such a certaine place, sometime he denyeth not but there may bee such a one, sometime he doubteth: sometime againe hee vtterly denyeth there is any at all, and thinketh that men are therein deceiued, by a certaine naturall good will they beare their friendes departed. But yet of this one errour hath there growen vp such a haruest of those massemongers, that the masses being sold abroad commonly in euery corner, the Temples of God became shoppes to get money, and silly soules were borne in hand, that nothing was more necessary to be bought. In deed there was nothing more gainefull for these men, then to sell masses for the dead. Your owne Roffensis sayeth, Nemo nunc dubitat Orthodous, an purgatorium sit, de quo tamen apud priscos, vel nulla, vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio: sed and Graecis ad hunc vsque diem non est creditum, quamdiu enim nulla esset cura de purgatorio, nemo quaesiuit indulgentias: No Catholique man nowe doubteth of Purgatory, wherof notwithstanding among the auncient Fathers, there is eyther no mention at all,  or very seldome, yea euen vntill this day the Grecians beleeue it not, for so long as there was no care of purgatory, no man sought after pardons. So much for Purgatory. Nowe I thinke it not amisse (my brethren) somewhat to speake against your praying for the dead. First I wil disproue your praying for the dead by scriptures. Then after, I will confute the same by the authoritie of the Doctours. To beginne with Scriptures, I cite the 2. of Samuel 12.22. While the childe was yet aliue, I fasted and wept, for I sayde, who can tell, whether God will haue mercy on me, that the child may liue? But nowe beeing dead, wherefore shoulde I nowe fast? Can I bring him againe any more? I shall goe to him, but hee shall not returne to mee. Psalme 49.7. A man can by no meanes redeeme his brother, hee cannot giue his ransome to God, so precious is the redemption of their soules, and the continuance for euer. Ecclesiastes 9.5. The dead know nothing at all, neyther haue they any more reward, for their remembrance is forgotten, and they haue no more portion for euer, in all that is done vnder the Sunne. All that thine hande shall fynde to doe, doe it with all thy power: For there is neyther worke, nor inuention, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the graue whither thou goest. Also 1. Thessalon. 4. I woulde not haue you ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleepe, that you sorrowe not euen as others which haue no hope:  for if we beleeue that Iesus is dead, and is risen, euen so them which sleepe in Iesus, will God bring w  him. Wherefore comforte your selues one another with these woordes. Thus much for scripture. Nowe will I alledge the ancient testimonies of the Fathers.  Cyprian in his sermon of mortalitie sayth thus, Seeyng that we know, that our brethren, which bee deliuered out of this worlde, by the hande and calling of the Lorde, are not lost, but sent before: wee must not here take on vs blacke gownes, syth that they haue already there put on whyte garments: we must not giue occasion vnto the Paynims, that they may deseruingly, and by good ryght blame vs, or lay to our charge, that we doe lament, and bewayle them, as perished and lost, whome wee doe affirme to liue with God, and so to proue with the testymonies of our hearts, and breake the same faith that we doe professe and set forth by our communication and talke. Againe hee in his first treatise against Demetrian, When we bee once departed out of this life, there is no more place of repentance, there is no more effect or working of satisfaction, life is here eyther lost or wonne, euerlasting saluation is here prouided for by the due worshipping of God, and the fruites of faith: then we shall bee without the fruite of repentance, and griefe of payne. In vaine shall weeping bee, and prayer shal be of no force or effect. Augustine in his first booke and 12. chapter of the time:  Therefore all these thinges, that is to wit, the looking vnto the corpes, or caring it, the conditi?? of the burying, and the pompe of the funerals, are rather for the comforte of the liuing, then for the ayde and helpe of the dead. If costly and precious burying doe profite the vngodly, vyle burying, and none at all shall hurt and hinder the godly. The multitude of seruants did in the sight of men make excellent and glorious funerals vnto that rich man that was all clothed in purple: but the ministery of Angels made much more excellent and noble funerall in the sight of God, vnto the poore silly creature that was ful of skabbes, blaynes and sores: for they did not lay him in a tombe of marble, but did cary him into the bosome of Abraham. Likewise in his fyrst treatise vpon the Epistle of Iohn, Whereof doe Schismes come? Hereof they come, when men say, We are righteous, we doe pray, we doe obteine. Hierom in his 13. quest. and 2. chap. We know that in this worlde wee can be helped one of another, eyther with prayers, or with counsell: but after wee bee once before the iudgement seate of Christ, neyther Iob, Daniel, nor Noah be able to pray for any body, but euery man shall beare his owne burthen. The councill of Toledo. 3. cap. 22.23. qu. 2. cap. qui diui. We doe bidde and commaunde, that they which depart out of this life by the diuine calling of the Lorde, bee caryed foorth to their graues, onely with Psalmes: for we doe altogether forbid y  same prayer of funerals, that they be wont to sing commonly for the dead. Item senten. 4. distinct. 45. Neque. Hee that prayeth for a Martyr, doth wr??g vnto the Martyr. Against praying for the dead, I thought it sufficient to speake thus much. Nowe I will speake a worde or two of praying to Saintes. First the Scripture forbiddeth it: for it is written, Psalme 80.11. Giue vs help against trouble, O Lord, for vaine is the helpe of man. Psalme 115.17. The dead praise not the Lorde, neyther they that goe downe into the place of silence. Esay 63.16. Doutlesse thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of vs, and Israel knew vs not, yet thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer. [1] Nowe for the fyrst. If the helpe of man bee in vayne, why then do you pray vnto Saintes? And, If the dead praise not the Lorde, to what ende then should they be prayed vnto? If Abrah?? and Israel (who were counted holy in the sight of God) knewe not of them that were in earth, shall wee thinke that other Saintes haue preeminence aboue the rest? No, no, we deceiue our selues, and the trueth is not in vs. Iere. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stoode before mee, yet mine affection coulde not bee towardes this people. Thus sayeth the Lorde, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh fleshe his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the Lorde. Ezechiel 14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Iob were among them, they shoulde deliuer but their owne soules by their righteousnesse, (sayeth the Lorde) yet I am the Lorde thy God, which brought thee from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me, for there is no Sauiour besides me. Esther 14.3. O my Lorde, (thou onely art our King) helpe me desolate woman, which haue no helpe but thee. Matth. 11.28. Come vnto mee all yee that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Iohn 14.6. Iesus sayde, I am the way, and the trueth. No man commeth vnto the Father, but by mee. To the first. If Gods [1] wrath kindled against his people coulde not be pacifyed at the intercession of Moses and Samuel, who were Saintes, howe can you perswade your selues, that Saint George or Saint Gregory, or any other Saint may be heard of God praying for you? To the second. Here is commination [2] of God pronounced against them that put their trust and confidence in man. But you put trust and confidence in saintes, who interpretiuely bee men. Ergo this curse toucheth you. These holy men, Noah, Daniel, and Iob can doe no more but saue their owne soules, they can not with their prayers procure the saluation of other men’s soules. These three were Saintes, and in fauour with God, as others be, they had the viewe of the glorious maiestie of God as others haue: Ergo I inferre, If there coulde no helpe be found in them, then you may be assured, no helpe is to be founde in others. To the [3] thirde. God telleth vs there is no other Saluation besides him, but you (my brethren) hope to bee saued through the clemencie of your Patrones that be Saynts: wherefore I conclude, that you breake the commaundements of GOD, when hee sayeth that none can saue you, but hee alone. [4] To the fourth. The desolate woman tooke GOD onely to bee her king, (and not some Saint or other) her shield, her buckler, her defence, her comforter and helper. In this her distresse and neede, she ranne not vnto some Saint to craue helpe at his handes, but vnto God himself, who was most ready to graunt her requestes. Therefore you are much to bee blamed, that you will not follow the allowable ex??ples of others. To the fift. Christ biddeth vs, [5] when wee are driuen to anye straights, or are grieued w  any kinde of troubles, to make our praiers vnto him, and not vnto Saints, for he maketh no mention thereof: and hee promiseth that our petitions shall be acceptable in his sight. Seing that of his bountifulnes hee willeth vs to come vnto him, why come you not to him, why goe you vnto others? O stubburne and froward generation, O vnthankfull, and disloyall subiects! You will not come when as you are bidden, you wil not receiue Gods gentlenes of himself offred, but seeke to craue of his seruants, against his will and pleasure. To the sixt. Christ telleth vs, that no man can come to y  Father but by him. If no man can come to the Father, but by Christ, Ergo in vayne do you then make your prayers vnto Saints. Act. 4.12. Neither is there saluation in any other: for among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen, wherby we must be saued. Rom. 10.14. How shall they cal on him, in whom they haue not beleeued? Iames 1.5. If any of you lacke wisdome, let him aske of God, which giueth to al men liberally. Euery good giuing, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and c??meth downe from the father of lights. You see in these places of scripture God telleth vs playnly, we c??not be saued (by any other, neither by this Saint nor that Saint) saue onely by Iesus Christ. Thus much out of the scriptures. Now let vs see what the Doctors speake against your praying vnto Saints. First I wil begin with Augustine in his second booke and 8. chap. against the Epist. of Parmenian. Saint Paul maketh not himselfe a mediatour betweene God and the people, but requireth that they pray all one for another, being all the members of Christ. If Saint Iohn would saye, This haue I written vnto you, that you sinne not, and if you sinne, you haue me your mediatour before God, and I will intreate for your sinnes, as Parmenian (the heretique) in a certaine place, made the Bishop a mediatour betweene God and the people: what good and faithfull christian man could abide him? Who would looke vpon him, as the Apostle of Christ? or rather who would not thinke him to bee Antichrist? Also vponthe 108. Psal. All praier, y  is not made vnto god by Christ, not only doth not put away sin, but also is turned into sinne. Item in his 3. booke of freewil. Wee are not c??manded to goe to any creature y  we may be made blessed, but to the creator and maker of al things, of whom (if we be perswaded otherwise then y  trueth is) we are deceiued w  a damnable error. It?? in his booke of y  spirit and the soule, 29. cha. The soules of th?? that are dead, are there where they do not see, neither heare what thinges are done, or chaunce in this life: Such is their care for the liuing, that they know not what we do, euen as our care is for the dead, that wee know not what they doe. Item, in his tenth treatise vpon Iohn. My mother whome you haue called blessed, therefore is blessed, because she hath kept the worde of GOD, and not because in her the word was made fleshe. Item, in his booke of the remission of sinnes, the 14. chap. The Apostle said truely, Bee you folowers of me, as I am of Christ He neuer durst saye, Bee you iustified of mee, as I am iustified of Christ. None is iust, but Christ iustifying. Therefore he sayd, He that beleeueth in him that iustifieth the vngodly, his fayth is counted for righteousnes. Who is so bolde therefore to saye, I iustifie thee, which may not bee said of the Saints, but of the holy of holiest, y  said, Beleeue in God,  beleeue also in me? Againe in his first treatise vpon the Epistle of Iohn: From hence commeth schismes, when men say, We are righteous, we make holy the vnholy, we doe iustifie the wicked, we doe pray, we do obtaine. Item in 84. treatise vp?? Iohn. Though we dye brethren for brethren, yet the blood of no Martyrs is shed for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, which thing Christ hath done for vs. Ambrose vpon the 1. chapter of the Romanes: But we obteine Gods fauour, from whome nothing is secret, as knowing what euery man is meete to haue, wee neede no spokesman, but a deuout minde, for whatsoeuer such a one speaketh vnto God, God wil answere him. Chrysost. in his 2. hom. of the woman of Canaan: Tell mee woman, sith thou art a wicked and sinfull woman, how durst thou go vnto him? I know (sayth shee) what I do. Beholde the wisedome of the woman, she prayeth not vnto Iames, she entreateth not Iohn, she goeth not vnto Peter: shee did not get her selfe to the company of the Apostles, shee sought for no mediator: but for all these things, she tooke repentance for her companion, which did fulfill the roome and place of an aduocate: and so shee did goe to the high fountaine. Item in his sermon of going forward of the Gospel: There is no neede of a Porter, of a Mediator or minister, no neede of Aduocates with God, nor of any running, and gadding about for to speake fayre vnto other: for although thou be alone, and without an aduocate, and praye vnto God by thy selfe, thou shalt obteyne thy petitions. Cyrill in his booke of right faith: He was taken vp into heauen: but as God he is shewed to graunt the petitions of them that worship him, if they make their prayers in his name. For why is it more meete to giue Saints their asking, and to graunt them their petitions, then for him, which is onely by his owne nature, and truely God? Leo Bishop of Rome, in his 81. Epistle: Although the death of many Saintes hath bene precious in the sight of the Lorde, yet the killing of no Innocent, hath bene the propitiation for the worlde. The righteous received, but gaue no crownes, and out of the valiantnes of the faithful are grauen examples of patience, not giftes of righteousnesse. For their deathes were euery one singuler to himselfe, and none of them did by his ende paye the debt of another, forasmuch as there is our Lord Christ, in whom all are crucified, all dead and buryed, and raised vp againe. Erasmus in his booke called the Preacher: If any man lacke wisedome, let him aske it of God, and not of the Saints. So much against praying vnto Saintes. Here in the first parte of my declaration, I haue (as you know) declared a true report of the wickednesse of Rome: I beganne with the Cardinals liues, proceeded to the Priestes, Monkes, and citizens, and ended with the Pope. Seeing you know these reportes to be true, for your owne saluation returne to the trueth. Bee not obstinate and frowarde in your false opinion. You are courteously and gently intreated, yet are you neuer the better, but rather the worse, like Frogs that keepe a great crooking and sturre against the light of the Sunne: so do you against the glorious and comfortable beames of Christ his Gospell. Be satisfied with trueth, and abuse not the mercifull lenitie of our gracious Soueraigne, lest that the Lordes discipline be restored, which shall restraine your spreading poyson, and auoyde the hazard whiche otherwise should happen, not onely to the church of God am??g vs, (which might not thriue amidst such pestilent and c??bersome weeds) but euen to the end??gering (which the Lorde of glorie turne from vs) of this florishing common weale, and her Maiesties most royal person, crowne and dignitie. Your malicious and cursed practises, as cocatrices, haue brought forth and hatched great dangers to y  c??mon weale already. If you should be set at libertie, without recantati?? escape vnpunished, winked at, fauoured and spared: greater mischiefe shal insue your treasonable practises, to y  ruine and desolation of this blessed lande, which God of his mercie turne awaye from vs. What pestiferous bookes haue our English fugitiues thrust foorth vnto vs, defacing Gods holy trueth, the Queene her royall Maiestie, many of her honorable counsell, and sundry of her louing and faithfull Subiects? Haue thei not also procured Antichrist, Pope Pius Quintus, to exc??municate our Redoubted Soueraigne, and al th?? that c??tent themselues, christianly and quietly to liue vnder her gouernment? But an vnderserued curse hurteth not. About Mids??mer last was twelue-month, they renued these bulles of excommunication, gra??ted by this Pope Gregory, vnder the color and name of Pius Quintus published. There were fiue hundreth copies printed at Rome, as two of you (my brethr??) can verifie the same, and how they were published, as I heard at Rome, in the Englishe Seminarie at Rheames, and were put fast to pillars in the citie. These Bulles of excommunication were scattered throughout all Italie, Spaine, and parte of Germanie. In these buls of exc??municati??, (forsooth) they haue discharged (if their discharge shoulde bee credited) her highnesse Subiects from their loyaltie and obedience to her Maiestie, their natural Prince. Haue not their Bulles pronounced her Maiestie to be no lawful Queen, whom God hath placed ouer vs? Haue not their attemptes bene the seede of rebellion? and haue they not caused, and doe cause to this day, many to practise secretly her graces destruction?  One of your Readers in Diuinitie positiue, I am certayne, before two hundreth scholers, and not so fewe, as one of you may testifie the same, most impudently and deuilishly spake, that it was lawfull for any man of worship in Englande, to giue authoritie to the vilest wretch that is, to seeke the death of our soueraigne Queene. But God who hath defended her, still preserue her: And then let K. P. who threatneth, and Antichrist, Pope Gregory an Italian borne in the citie of Bolonia, who prouoketh, ioyne their powers together: yet shee shall preuayle, to their shame, and to her honour. Father Pais a Spaniard borne, reader in scholastical diuinity in y  Romane colledge at Rome, said in y  presence of three hundreth scholers at least, these were his woordes, Bona Papae voluntas trita and manifesta est, and eius crumena parata, sed R. P. aut metus subtrahit, aut potestatis defectus vetat, vt su?? in Angliam exercitum ducere non audeat. That is, the Popes good will is tried and knowne, and his purse ready, but K. P. either feare withdraweth, or power forbiddeth him that hee dare not venter, to bring his Army of Souldiers into Englande. But least that I be too tedious to my hearers, of this first part I wil make an end, beseeching you my brethren to become loyall and faythfull to your naturall Prince, forsaking your superstitious Idolatrie and cursed religion, your pompous glorie, and prowde hierarchie, and thus much for the first part.The second part.Qui veniunt ad vos vestitu ouium, andc.Which come vnto you in sheepes clothing, andc.In this place (being the sec??d part of my diuision) wh?? the holy Ghost biddeth vs: Beware of false prophets, he addeth also a note or marke, to know them by, in these words: Which come vnto you in sheepes clothing. In the first words, which come vnto you, there is also giuen vs one mark of a false prophet, y  is, to go before he be sent, in y  last words, In sheepes clothing, is shewed, that when false prophetes come, it is but w  flatterie and dissimulation. For to come in sheepes clothing: is nothing else, but to feine himselfe a sheepe, that is, to make thy selfe holy, whereas thou art nothing lesse, to name thy selfe a follower of Christes holy worde, wheras thou art obedient to the traditi??s of m??, to name thy selfe a Prophet, whereas y  art not, to name thy selfe a teacher of the trueth, wheras thou art a maintainer of lies: to resemble a sheepe in outward shew, but in wardly to be a Foxe. What a false prophet is, you may know if ye reade these places of scripture that follow, to witte, Esa. 56. Ierem. 6.23. Ezech. 22.34. Philip. 3.4. and the 2. to Timoth. 3. Titus 1.2. Pet. 2. Luk. 16. Rom. 16. For whiles they giue themselues vnto couetousnesse, (and that vnder a colour of godlinesse,) what can otherwise fall out, then that which S. Peter sayth, With fained wordes they shoulde make marchandize of Gods people.  So did the false Prophetes amongst the Iewes: so did their sacrificers, Matt. 15.5. with them, as our massem??gers haue done with vs. What maner worshipping of God haue they feyned? what snares haue they laide? namely Indulgences, purgatorie, watchings, masses for the dead, workes of supererogation, and in fine to that passe they brought it, that obscured y  grace of our redemption, wherewith al such as beleue, by Iesus Christ are freely redeemed, and get eternall life. No man thinketh amongst the Papistes, but they either deserue eternall life (by reason of their owne workes:) or els if their outward workes fayle, to be damned for euer. This is y  same diabolicall perdition, with the sway whereof, a great part of Christendome is caried headl??g. And the cause hereof is, that men haue ytching eares, and therfore procure vnto themselues heapes of teachers,  to feede their fonde humors, men are highminded, self willed, louers of themselues, beyng wedded to their owne wayes, and marryed vnto their owne deuices, they leaue the law of God, and follow after the traditions of men. What (I praye you) is the cause, that there be so many papistes in England? is it not, because the true preachers are not beleeued? The trueth offendeth them, the Scriptures mislike them, they are delighted with falsehoode, and content to staye themselues vpon men’s inuentions. Preceptes are giuen, and yet the precepts of God are not regarded, ensamples abounde, and yet the ensamples of the constant and faithfull martyrs of God are derided and scoffed at, the wholsome counsels of the godly eyther are lightly contemned, or else heard with so small profite, that they enter in at the one eare, and goe out at the other. Is it then to be maruayled, if Christ suffer these pretensed prophetes, (the Papists I meane) to seduce them from his trueth? reade 1. of the kings 22.22. In Achab the like hath bene done before, and in Ezech. 13.10. and 22.28. we reade of them that buylded with vntempered morter. Seeing then that they will not giue credite vnto Gods worde, and therewith be contented, God is not to be blamed, if (that these false prophetes deceyuing them with an outward shewe of holinesse) he giue them vp to strong delusions,  that they fall from the trueth to error, from light vnto darkenes, from heauen to hell. Such as teach them the trueth, are despised, and others that instruct them in the dregges of idolatrie, are esteemed and had in great reputation. These false prophets, that they may bring these carnal men vnto perfection: they tell them how their forefathers liued, wh?? they embraced papistrie, howe that in comming to Churches, they were very diligent, in worshipping of images they were deuoute, howe paynefull in visiting holy places, howe liberall vnto the poore, howe mercifull to the afflicted, and lastly, howe carefull they were to keepe Gods commandements. Where be all these good workes (saye they) what is become of them? Nowe one man seeketh to beguile another, one man speaketh euill of an other, their deuoti?? to the church is waxen colde, charitie towards the poore is more then frozen. andc. And whereof (say they) proceedeth this heape of all mischiefe, the ripenes of this impietie what roote hath it, springeth it not fr?? the corrupt doctrine of the newe fangled Preachers? Vnto all these supposed cauilles, and most manifest slaunders (for other are they not, but slaunders and those meere supposed) I answere, whereas they speake of the godly liues of their forefathers (if their liues had bene holy) these their good works, whereof they boast, were not vndoubted markes of true religion. For reade the hystoryes of the Gentiles, let the liues of the olde Philosophers both Greekes and Latines bee perused: and it shall not bee able to be gaynesayed, that for the ciuill state of their life, and the morall vertues, they lyued as vprightly as euer your forefathers did: yea, and that in such excellencie, that some of them were euen beautified by the names of the vertues themselues: as Socrates the Constant, Plato y  religious, Regulus the promise keeper, Cato the sober, and such like: yet neyther did their liues proue their religion to be true, neyther was heau?? able to be scaled by so short and weake a ladder. As for that they blame the liues of them that professe the Gospell, and thereupon inferre that they haue no true religion, they speake more (by their leaues) then trueth wil warrant. For the imperfections of Gods children, and the sinnes of particular men, are not auaileable to disherite them of true religion:  as the drunkennes of Noah, the incest of Lot, y  adultery and murther of Dauid, y  backsliding of S. Peter, andc do declare, of wh?? to say they sinned, and therfore they were not in the right way, were to conclude very impertinently, and without all rule of reason. Now wheras vpon this weake supposall grounded vp?? an vntruth, ye misreport of y  preachers of England, saying, that they allow all licentiousnesse of life, it is cleane contrary, for they dilig??tly exhort the people to amendement of life: they condemne not good workes, no, they commend them highly. herein truely you and they do differ: they make workes to followe faith as the fruites, according to that S. August.  sayeth, Opera sequ??tur iustificatum non praecedunt iustificandum: You make workes the grounde and faith the roofe, putting the cart before the horse, and heate before the fyre. The Queene goeth before, and her handmaydes folow, not that she is not able to go without them, but that as necessarily to the Maiestie and Royal port of a prince such attendance is necessary: so is it in faith, and works. You my brethren say that good workes are necessary, thereby to merite heauen and deserue saluation. But as the scriptures are flat against you, euen so are the doctours also, none of th?? do beare with you, they all beare against you. We teach the people trueth, you fables. Wee preach faith, and yet exhorte vnto good workes, you seeke more for the huske then for the kernel. We are not such as Cardinall Hosius misdeemeth vs to bee ? in non-Latin alphabet ?, naughtie and euil preachers, neither preach wee any thing that Gods worde alloweth not. How your Elders and our forefathers liued, it standeth you in hande to consider of: they put their sonnes into monasteries, and their daughters vnto Nunneries, what they did they haue answered, if they did well, they are pardoned by mercie in the promise made vnto Abraham: if euil, no m?? shal haue a crowne but hee that fighteth lawfully. yet herein ye offer them a great deale of wrong, y  as blind guides leading them into bypathes, robbing th?? of their inheritance, spoiling th?? of the trueth of Gods worde, ye put the sheepe to answere for y  blindnesse of the shepheard. That they liued in ignorance it can not bee denyed, it was not of faith,  for it was not grounded vpon the writt?? word of God: They did as they were taught, if they had bene taught better, better woulde they haue done, yet is it not fit y  we shoulde cond??ne any mans seruant whether he stande or fall. Neither is their early rising to Mattens, to their Complyn at midnight, their going barelegged and barefoote, their fasting and wilful pouertie, their hard lying, their whippings their going in sackecloth, their l??g praying in the streetes, nor all other y  like practises able to drawe vs from the trueth. nay what wil ye answere when God shall aske you,  Why did ye worship me with men’s traditions? who hath required this at your handes? Reade the booke entituled, Hierosolomitanus peregrinus, you shal finde, that the Turkes liue more austerely in their Monasteries and abroad, then euer any of you did. It were too long to rehearse their outwarde godlinesse, they fast and pray as you doe, they build Temples, they maintayne hospitals, they visit the sicke, they pray in the night time more then you doe, and the day tyme they spend either in prayer, or in some good woorke. They clothe the naked, feede the hungry, harbor the harborlesse, they followe you in al points of good woorks, yea, and they farre surpasse you. For proofe hereof, I referre you to the reading of their Histories. yet will ye not say (I thinke) that the Turkes for all their good workes are like to bee saued. If this were a good argument, y  by good works men are saued: then could I reason thus:The Turkes do good works, But they which doe good workes shalbe saued: Ergo the Turkes shalbe saued.And whereas you say, y  they did well which make their daughters Nonnes. For (say you) they serue God and our Ladie: if their seruice be good and commendable, seeing that they attribute and apply that vnto our Lady, which (in Dauids Psalmes) is spoken of God the father and the sonne, iudge you. For when they pray, they pray after this maner, In te domina speraui, miserere mei domina,dixit dominus dominae meae, sede mater mea a dextris meis, andc. In thee O Lady haue I trusted, O Lady haue mercie vpon mee, the Lord said vnto my Ladie, sit my mother at my right hand, andc. In such sort, that these blasphemies, which they call our Ladies houres, were the chiefe deuotion of those that were most deuoute. Nowe seeing the blessed virgin was put in Christs place: I aske what remayneth for him? and if, because shee bred hym and bare him, and brought him forth, she accomplished y  saluation of those that cal vp?? her, what then was there, that he should deliuer himselfe to death for vs? But let mee (I praye you) speake a worde or two, concerning the doctrine of these false prophets, which teacheth a man to be iustified by his good workes. If I should iustifie my selfe, myne owne mouth shall condemne mee (saith Iob: ) for if I woulde bee perfect, mine owne mouth shall condemne me, we haue bene all as an vncleane thing (sayth Esay) and all our righteousnes is as filthy cloutes.  When yee haue done all those thinges which are commanded: (saith our Sauiour) say th??, We are vnprofitable seruants, wee haue done but y  which was our duetie to doe. And there is none righteous,  no not one: by the workes of the lawe shall no flesh be iustified in his sight, and all these words come from y  mouth of God. But seeing ye wil hardly admit the testimonie of Gods worde, without the witnesse of men: go to, let vs see what say the fathers in this behalfe? I doe scarcely (saith Origen) beleeue that there can be any worke,  that may of duetie require a reward.  Basill saith that hee trusteth not in his owne good deedes, nor hopeth to be iustified by his works, he hath the onely hope of his saluation in the mercies of GOD. And Saint Hierome,  If we behold our owne merits, we must be driuen to desperation. The time will not serue to handle this matter at large, therefore I ende this part, beseeching al those that loue the Gospell vnfeinedly, to take diligent heede to such false Prophetes, as come vnto them in sheepes clothing, faining them selues holy, and by their holines thinke them selues iustified.The thirde part.Sed intrinsecùs sunt lupi rapaces.But inwardly they are rauening wolues.Although our English popish Priestes, (that come from Rome, or else from Rheimes in France,to this our natiue soyle) tell vs that they haue taken great labor, passed many daungers, yea and hazarded their owne lyues to saue our soules fr?? eternall damnation, and endles miserie, they are not to be beleeued for all these their brags. They are rauening wolues, they seeke y  euerlasting confusion both of our bodies and soules. What doe they teach, but false doctrine? doe they not seeke to persuade vs to worship stocks and stones, yea (which is worst) to worship that idole in the Sacrament? They teache more, then they are well able to performe. Howe can they proue, y  Christ is really and transsubstantially in the sacrament of the altar? This is the effect and force of all their arguments: Christ spake it, wh?? he sayde, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. They will haue no Tropicall figure herein to be expressed, for that Christ sayde and promised, that he woulde speake no more in parables. This argument is nought, if you saye, that Hoc est corpus meum, be a parable. If you saye, that Christ promised to vse no more figuratiue speaches, you are farre deceyued. For hee vsed a ? in non-Latin alphabet ? in this phrase, Hic est calix noui Testam??ti, quem si biberit quispiam, andc. This is the cup of the newe Testament, which whosoeuer shall drinke, andc. You know no man can drinke the cuppe: wherefore here is Continens pro contento, the thing conteyning, for y  thing conteined. If Christ vsed a figure in this phrase, Hic est calix, andc. Why shoulde he not in like wise vse a ? in non-Latin alphabet ? in this phrase, Hoc est corpus meum?Fe The death of Christ is not really present in the Sacrament. ri But the blood of Christ is presentin the Sacrament, as his death is present. The Minor proposition is proued out of Ambrose, in his fourth booke of the Sacramentes, and fourth chapter, Vt recepisti suae mortis similitudinem, sic bibis similitudinem sui preciosi sanguinis: As thou hast receyued the similitude of his death, so doest thou drinke the similitude of his blood.Dis The true naturall bodie of Christ is placed in heauen.am But the true natural body of man, can bee but in one place.is Therefore the true naturall body of Christ can be but in one place, and at one time in heauen. The Maior is proued thus, Iesus receptus est in coelos, and sedet ad dexteram Dei, andc. Iesus was received vp into heauen, and sitteth at the right hande of GOD the Father.  Pauperes semper habetis vobiscum, me verò non semper habebitis: The poore haue you alwayes with you, but me shall yee not haue alwayes. Ioh. 12. Desero mundum, and eo ad patrem: I forsake the worlde, and goe to my Father. Multi dicent in eo die, Ecce,  hic est Christus, and ecce, ibi: Many wil say in that day, Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there he is. Whatsoeuer is in many and diuers places at once, is God. The body of Christ is not God, but a certaine creature. Therefore the body of Christ can not be in many places at once.Da Euery quantitie (that is) euery body that hath l??gth, breadth, and thicknes, is conteined in one peculiar place. ri Christes bodye hath length, breadth and thicknes, and is a quantitie.o Therefore Christes body is contained in one peculiar place. The Maior is prooued out of Cyrill in his thirde booke of the Trinitie, pag. 245. Quic quid intelligitur habere corpus, hoc indubiè est in loco, and in magnitudine and in quantitate. Et si sit in quantitate, euitare non potest circumscriptionem, hoc est habere suum locum: What thing soeuer is vnderstoode to haue a body, that without doubt is in a place, in magnitude and in quantitie. And if it be in quantitie, then it must needes be in some peculiar place.Fe No naturall body can at one and the same time haue contrarie and diuers qualities.ri But to be in one place local, in another not locall, in one place with quantitie, in another without qu??titie, in one place finite, in another infinite, is to admit contrary qualities to a natural body o Therefore the body of Christ can not be in one place locall, in another place not locall, in one place with quatitie, in another place without quantitie. We must so defend the humanitie of Christ, that we destroye not his diuinitie. If we assigne to Christes body plurality of places, wee destroye his diuinitie: wherefore we must not assigne to Christes body pluralitie of places. The mysticall signification that you haue imagined of your shewes and accidents, that the formes of breade and wine outwardly represent the spirituall nourishing of the soule, is vaine and fantastical, without the witnes of any auncient Doctour, or father, and is confirmed only by the authority of y  Pope himselfe. For what maner of feeding is there in these accidents and holy formes, or howe can that thing that feedeth not the body, represent vnto vs y  spiritual feeding of y  soule? The matter is plaine ynough of it selfe, and needeth no cauill. The signification and substance of the Sacrament is to shew vs, how we are fed with the body of Christ, that is, that like as materiall bread feedeth our bodie, so the body of Christ nayled on the crosse, embraced and eaten by faith, feedeth the soule. The like representati?? is also made in the Sacrament of Baptisme: that as our body is washed cleane with water, so our soule is washed cleane w  Christes blood. Therefore S. Aug. saith, Nisi Sacram??ta similitudinem quandam earum rerum, quarum Sacram??ta sunt, haberent, omninò Sacramenta non essent: If Sacraments had not a certaine likenes and representation of the thinges whereof they be sacraments, then in deede they were no Sacraments. This representation Rabanus Maurus lib. 1.23. expoundeth thus, Quia panis corpora confirmat, ideò ille congruenter corpus Christi nuncupatur, and quia vinum sanguinem operatur in carne, ideo refertur ad sanguinem: Because (not the accidents or formes of bread) but bread it selfe confirmeth the body, therefore it is conueniently called the body of Christ. And because wine worketh bloud in the flesh, therfore it hath relati?? vnto y  blood. so likewise saith Druthmarus in Matth. cap. 28. Vinum laetificat and sanguinem auget, and ideo non inconuenienter sanguis Christi per hoc significatur. This I speak briefly of the sacrament of your Masse. Reade the olde and newe Testament, and marke if you finde any one word directly, or indirectly, secretly, or plainely, which speaketh nigh or farre, of the sacrifice of your Masse, which is in controuersie betweene vs. Contrariwise, see if you doe not finde therin from line to line, that Christ is the onely sacrifice once offered vp for all: that there is one onely washing in y  bloud of Christ, y  there is one only God, to be called vp?? in the onely name of Iesus Christ. If you finde there the doctrines which we c??demne, then in heart and voyce condemne vs, and cry fagot and fire against vs. If not, recant then, and be sory for your errors, cry God and the Queene mercy. Be sorowful that you haue miscalled our soueraigne Lady, and that you haue sayd you would burne her bones, and burne all them of her most honorable counsel, that fauoured not your cursed attempts, eyther aliue or dead: Many of whose names I could rehearse, but for certaine causes I wil put the first letter of their names. let L. serue the roome of a Lorde, and S. of a Knight. B. for a Bishop. andc. L.K. who is dead, L. T. who is aliue, E. L. aliue, E. B. aliue, E. W. aliue, E. H. S. F. K. S. F. W. S. H. S. M. R. of L. Ar. B. of C. M. D. of C. and all such as haue punished (or fauoured not) their idolatrous religion. B. of L. M. D. of P. L. D. of Yor. L. B. of Win. who is dead, B. of Salisb. D. of Salisb. M. I. F. preacher at London. D. H. at Oxenforde. D. F. preacher at Cambridge, with diuers others, vpon whom you sayd, you would shew no mercy. A man had neede to take heede of such, as yet you are, who make men beleeue (for all this their spight and malice towards their own natiue soyle, which they greatly wish to be destroyed w  fire, sword, and famine: this am I able to verifye by such as are already conuerted to the trueth of Christ his Gospell, and yet I haue omitted many things of their hatred and practises against this Realme of Engl??d) y  they hazard their liues to saue our soules from hell, whereas in very deede, they haue wrought (as much as lieth in them) our eternall damnation, and so inwardly are rauening woolues. what do they teach our Englishmen, but y  the Pope is supreme head, and that, if they will be saued, they must acknowledge y  Pope to be soueraine Lord? This they teach without proofe of scripture. Saint Cyprian sayth,  Vnum esse Episcopatum, cuius quilibet Episcopus tenet suam partem integr?? sine diuisione. Praeterea nullum sui t??poris vocasse aut fecisse seipsum Episcop?? Episcoporum, aut tyrannide suos sibi subiecisse socios. That is, y  there is but one Bishopricke, of which euery Byshop holdeth his part wholy without any diuision. Also, that none of his time eyther called or made himselfe Bishop of Byshops, eyther made through tyrannie his companions subiect to his obedience. Also he complayning that prophane men, and Schismatiques withdrew themselues to the Byshop of Rome, sayeth that there were none y  did so, but certeyne desperate and wicked felowes, perswading themselues that the Bishops of Affricke haue lesse power then the Bishop of Rome. Saint Chrysost. sayeth in homil. 83. in Matt. cap. 23. Quicunque Episcoporum primatum in terra desiderabit, confusionem in coelis reperiet, et qui caput omni?? esse contendet, non c??putabitur in numero seruorum Christi: Whosoeuer (sayth hee) of the Byshops shall desire supremacie in earth, he shal finde confusion in heauen, and he that shal desire to be the chiefe, he shall not be reputed in the number of the seruants of Christ. Loe here, the fathers of your owne Church say, that the Pope is not supreme head. As for scriptures, reade them throughly, and you shal not finde one onely text to ground your supremacie vpon. Wherfore (good brethren) seeing that your owne Doctors speake against you, bee reconciled with me that am conuerted by Gods grace, and the industrie of his instrum??ts, the right worshipful sir Owyn Hopton knight, the Queenes Maiesties Lieutenant of this towre of London, and diuers godly preachers. Be with me reconciled, I say, and let vs with one accord embrace y  truth, and become loyall and obedient subiectes to our soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, who so graciously and fauourably dealeth with vs, that, whereas (forsaking our country, and submitting our selues to the gouernment, or rather tyrannie of an Italian priest) wee haue deserued the heauie wrath of our louing Queene to be punished with death, by our recantation our trespasse may be forgotten, life graunted, and wee brought into fauour againe. Wherefore, my louing brethren, (considering the promise of the bountifull clemencie of our gracious Queene, ready at al times to pardo? our rebellious and traiterous offences committed against her Maiestie, and the dayly labour that this right worshipful knight sir Owyn Hopton by name taketh, to c??uert vs to the trueth of the Gospel)recant, recant, cast not away wilfully your bodyes and soules to endlesse paine: shorten not your dayes, which God hath lent you here vpon earth to do good, and make not an ende of th?? in a bad cause. Allowe not the Popes supremacie, canons of council, decrees of fathers, constitutions of men, rites and ceremonies, pardons and indulgences, inuocation of saintes, merites by workes, pilgrimage, masses, diriges, trentalles, images, pictures, reliques, altars, shrines, liues of fayned saintes, false miracles, visions, dreames, fantasies and such other trashes without warr??t of Gods worde, as it appeareth to y  world in your serm??s and Romish postils. And in fine, be not Pharises, set not light by the Gospel of Iesus Christ, forsake not y  law of God, to folowe after the traditions of men. In vanum mihi seruiunt (saith our sauiour Christ in the Gospell of saint Matthew 15.) cum nihil, aliud docent quàm traditiones homin??: In vaine do they serue me, while they teach such doctrines as are nothing but the commandements of men. Say not, that there be seuen sacraments, seeing the Church of God receiueth but two, numero paucissima,  of the smallest number, (as Augustine writeth) which are Baptismus trinitatis nomine c??secratus, and c??municatio corporis and sanguinis ipsius: Baptisme halowed in the name of the trinitie, and the communicating of his blessed body and blood, figured in the olde Testament by the circumcision and the paschall lambe. Repent (my brethren) repent, and crye to God for grace and mercy. Let it neuer grieue you to returne from these princes of darkenes, the deuill and the Pope. And in deed what haue you seene in the court of Rome? Christ in exile, and Antichrist reigne in his stead, Beelzebub the iudge, wolues let loose, and the lambes in y  stocks. Ah good God, who shall deliuer the world from this oppression? who shall gather together the sheepe? who shall reproue and conuince the wicked pastors? Shall there neuer be a limitation and ende of this intolerable mischiefe? Howe long shal the Pope and his shauelings, who haue neyther fayth, godlines nor trueth, deceiue thy poore sheepe? Howe long shal the sonne of perdition reigne ouer thy flocke? who being but a man, lifteth vp him selfe aboue Kings, yea aboue Angels, and aboue the heauen of heauens, and hath caused men to dispute that hee is not  simply a man, but a partaker of the diuine nature with Christ, and that he hath the fountaine and roote of y  spirite of Christ in him. To be short, whereas thou, O Christ, hast submitted thy self vnder heauen, earth and hell, he wil c??maund kings, angels,  deuils and all, vnder colour of the key of the word, which thou hast deliuered to thy ministers. I aske, (thou being God, and made man for the saluation of the worlde) how it can bee that this man, which maketh himselfe God, shoulde be any other, then that sonne of perdition, come for the perdition of the worlde. Thou that hast bene wounded for our transgressions, and smitten for our iniquities, and with whose stripes we are healed, gouerne, helpe, and succour thy flocke: let Antichrist perish, and be discomfited by the breath of thy holy mouth, and abolished by the brightnesse of thy blessed and wished comming. Come Lorde Iesu, come quickly, for thy names sake. Let all the people saye, Amen.     FINIS.